We are all likely to agree that Ivan Ilych did not live as he should have.1 The question is, what does this have to do with the sort of death he had? That is, would someone who had lived differently necessarily have a different sort of death, in the sense that his process of dying and also what his death itself signiﬁed would be different? And would everyone who lived as Ivan lived have Ivan’s sort of death? Tolstoy exhibits a critical attitude toward Ivan, his wife, and doctors when they think that there * For comments on earlier versions of this article, I am grateful to Richard Arneson, Derek Parﬁt, John Richardson, Thomas Scanlon, members of the Stanford Ethics Group, the Department of Philosophy, University of California at San Diego, students in my graduate class at Harvard University, and the editors of Ethics. This article was written while I was a fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, supported by Mellon grant 2986639 and AHRQ/NEH Fellowship grant FA-36625-01. 1. Leo Tolstoy, “The Death of Ivan Ilych,” trans. Louise Maude and Aylmer Maude, in The Kreutzer Sonata and Other Short Stories (New York: Dover, 1993). In brief, this is the way Ivan lived. He conformed to the social code, having a profession, a wife, and a family, but he was driven by concern for social and professional climbing, had no deep feelings for others, enjoyed having power over them, and got pleasure from superﬁcial pursuits. We may not agree that everything was all wrong with his mature years. For example, he was an incorruptible judge. This should count for something positive, at least if the laws he applied had any justice in them. One may even argue that the real pleasure he took in his last interior decoration project can be defended. However, when Tolstoy has Ivan say that his life was all not right, Tolstoy may have in mind that the reasons why Ivan did even the useful acts in his life were wrong. That is, the principle (or maxim) of his conduct was competitive social climbing. Tolstoy would then be suggesting that when we judge our lives, we focus on the maxim at the root of it, rather than on behavior. But surely it would be correct to feel better about a life in which we did not kill someone (due to an accidental intervention) than one in which we did, even if the deep maxim in each life that led us to act as we did was equally wrong. This is the problem of moral luck. Even if this were true, we should remember that Tolstoy’s point is that someone who was not a bad person in the most obvious criminal way can still have a remarkably worthless life. Since most people are not criminals, this makes Ivan’s story of greater relevance to them. Ethics 113 (January 2003): 202–233 䉷 2003 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0014-1704/2003/113020001$10.00 202 This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 203 is a way for him to avoid death on this occasion by doing something different, for example, taking medicines regularly, and so on. This need for control is thought to exemplify their failure to understand what is going on. When Ivan asks himself why he has to suffer physically and die, if not because he has done something wrong for which he is being punished, our ﬁrst impulse is to say that this is wrong; this is not the explanation of what is happening to him. However, I wish to consider the possibility that Tolstoy’s story reveals how we can have some control over our deaths—the process of dying and what death itself signiﬁes—by how we choose to live. I shall consider several characteristics of Ivan’s death and dying process and see whether their presence could vary with how we live. I One of the characteristics of Ivan’s death is that he does not believe that it could possibly happen to him.2 Ivan says that he knew the syllogism “Caius is a man, men are mortal, therefore Caius is mortal,” and he believed it to be true of Caius and of man in the abstract—but what did that have to do with him, Ivan? He was not a man in the abstract but someone with particular characteristics and a rich subjectivity (p. 44). Perhaps Ivan’s logical difﬁculty may be described as follows: he thinks that the universal premise “All men are mortal” does not apply when a man has particular characteristics and especially an active subjective life. So, in a sense, he is raising an objection to the correctness of the universal premise. Of course, he is wrong to think that having particular characteristics and an active subjective life are defenses against death. However, he also makes another mistake. He says that Caius, who would be a particular person with a particular history and rich subjectivity, is a man in the abstract and therefore not in possession of characteristics that would protect him from mortality as much as Ivan’s version of those characteristics are supposed to protect Ivan. We now see that Ivan’s reasons for failing to see that the syllogism applies to him but for believing that it applies to Caius connects up with the way he has lived his life: he has not taken seriously the nonabstract reality of other persons (which is not to say that he has taken his reality as seriously as he should have either). So, when something bad happens to them, he ﬁnds no reason to think that it will happen to him. In his professional role as a judge, he has never taken seriously what their fates mean to the people whose lives depend on his decisions. He has focused on the law and its outcome, not on its impact on the persons at trial. In his personal relations, he has developed standard 2. Not in the sense that Epicurus thought that death could not happen to him, i.e., when death was present, he was not, and when he was present, death was not. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 204 Ethics January 2003 responses to his wife that will prevent his life from being upset by having to engage with her problems. It would be easier for him to accept the universal premise in the syllogism and its application to him, if he took seriously—given his knowledge that others die—that others have the same special reality to themselves that he has to himself. His failure to seriously accept a universal premise also shows itself in Ivan’s inability to accept that he can come to be treated by others as he has treated others. The “turning of the tables” motif is strong in the story: doctors treat him as a set of organs rather than a person whose life is at stake, in the way he has treated defendants as interesting cases rather than persons whose lives were at stake.3 His wife takes up a standard line to help her cope with his illness as he took up a standard line with her. (Her line fails to deal seriously with him as a dying person; she claims that he is to blame for not following doctors’ orders; if he followed them, he need not die.) In sum, Ivan believed that it was alright to act on a maxim toward others that he would not be willing to universalize, including to have applied to himself. However, if Ivan were treated only as he has treated, he would not have received the honest and sympathetic concern of Gerasim, his servant. Possibly, Gerasim’s help may be seen as a cosmic return for his own better impulses, which were repressed after childhood. Despite his difﬁculties with including himself in universals and his mistaking why others are susceptible to them, there is one logical move with which Ivan has no problems. One way of thinking of this move is from the singular case involving something bad happening to himself to the universal of something bad happening to everyone. Once he realizes that he will die, he reﬂects on the coming deaths of others who are as foolish as he was in not realizing that they will die. Instead of pitying them as he wishes to be pitied, he takes satisfaction in their susceptibility to the universality of death. Similarly, once he realizes that he has not lived as he should have, he becomes aware of how almost everybody around him is repeating his mistakes. Again, instead of pitying them the errors of their ways, he hates them for it. (This hatred may stem from the fact that living as they do, they were co-conspirators in his wasting his life. He could not have done it so well without them.) The move from one’s own case to the universal is not an error if one’s fate is caused by a property that others also have, and the cause of mortality is such a property. So, the syllogism is (1) I am mortal in virtue of being human; (2) they are all human; therefore, (3) they are all mortal. Similarly, if doing x is the wrong way for Ivan to live because it is the wrong way for human persons in general to live, it will be wrong for everyone as well. 3. “Ivan Ilych” can be read, in part, as a primer on professional ethics. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 205 If he makes this move from his own case to the universal, the universal has more reality for him than “it” had when he believed it only of some others, because he now applies it to his inner circle of family and friends who have also (in his thoughts) previously been exempt from death.4 He also applies it to people to whom (unlike Caius) he attributes a subjectivity, for, in calling them fools, he recognizes their beliefs about themselves that they will not die. However, there is a slightly different way of interpreting the logical move with which Ivan has no problems. He moves from his own case to the cases of those who he thinks are like him, that is, his friends and their deaths become as nonabstract for him as his own. This does not yet generate a true universal from the subjectively real personal and so it does not transmit the force of the personal in order to deabstract even the death of Caius. The syllogism here is (1) I, even with my special characteristics, am mortal in virtue of being human; (2) others who share my special characteristics are human; therefore, (3) they are mortal. Going from his own case to the case of those he can see as like him in many ways (rather than transforming the still abstract universal) mirrors what happens to his so-called friend, Peter Ivanovich, at the very beginning of the story. Even if Peter, like Ivan, cannot move from Caius and all men to his own case, he can move from Ivan’s death to his own. He becomes aware that someone very much like him has died and it could happen to him. Tolstoy implies that this is how death becomes subjectively real to someone who is not yet dying, rather than through the universal syllogism. The death of someone like oneself makes clear that many of the characteristics that one has and Caius lacks cannot save one, since they did not save one’s friend who also had them. But there is still a route of escape for someone like Peter, who is not the one dying—he can just rely on his bare particularity to save him, at least for the time being. He says, “I am not Ivan, so he is dead and I am not.” The further implicit thought is “Possibly I won’t have to be.”5 4. It is bizarre that Ivan thinks that these all were immune from death, given that Tolstoy says that several of Ivan’s children had already died. However, this may also be an indication of how distant he was from his own children; for if they were as abstract for him as Caius, it is no surprise that he does not include them in the circle of those who cannot die. (Perhaps the frequency of death in pre-antibiotic times required one to put it out of one’s mind?) The fact that others in his circle were taken by him also to be exempt from death reduces the plausibility of the view that he believes he cannot die because the end of his subjectivity is the very end of the world, although something like this seems to be going on (p. 42), when he says “when I am not, what will there be? There will be nothing.” 5. Peter Ivanovich is by no means the worst of the characters Tolstoy portrays. He is vulnerable to truth and capable of horror at the report of Ivan’s agony. The character who represents the devil is Schwartz. He maintains an air of amusement at the funeral This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 206 Ethics January 2003 A true friend (let alone a clearheaded thinker), however, might not be able to latch onto this separating mechanism. On the one hand, true sympathy draws a friend closer to the person who died so that he thinks more about the bad thing that has happened to his friend and his own loss of that friend rather than about what all this implies about his own mortality. But, on the other hand, identiﬁcation with one’s friend also reinforces the sense of equality (or perhaps even personal subordination to the friend), so one is more likely to sadly accept a shared fate with one’s friend. The thought comes, if it was possible for death to happen even to my beloved friend, why should it not be possible that it happen to me?6 In addition to his failure to be convinced by the syllogism concerning Caius, Ivan believes that if something as important as his being mortal were true, there would be some clue to it arising from his own subjectivity, independent of empirical evidence and logical implications from universals. There would be, he thinks, an instinctive awareness of one’s own mortality in the way Ivan, we are told, had instinctive awareness of the right way to live (as evidenced by his initial revulsion at socially approved norms). But as he repressed and ignored these intimations of how to live, he no doubt would have repressed and ignored intimations of mortality had they existed. Hence, I believe we can agree that the way Ivan lived does explain one characteristic of his death, namely, his shock at the fact that he will die. Tolstoy contrasts Ivan’s ignorance on this matter with the openeyed awareness of the fact that all die that common folk like Gerasim have, an awareness that they do not repress. Presumably, it is part of their goodness to recognize the reality of others and not think of themselves as remarkable exceptions; this, more than mere logical abilities in dealing with a universal premise, helps explain their knowledge. and seduces Peter away from serious thoughts to a card game. (Might the choice of the name “Peter” be intended to remind us of Saint Peter, who also tried to be faithful to his friend but was not completely successful?) 6. That is, there is a crucial difference in attitude between (a) simply drawing a conclusion from the fact that something has happened to someone with traits you share and (b) being unwilling to attribute traits to yourself that might make you fare better than someone else. This is, however, not the same as being as appalled at someone else’s death as one is at the idea of one’s own death. The more one is appalled by the idea of one’s own death by comparison to the death of a friend, the more one thinks the worst has not yet happened when a friend dies but one still remains alive, the less one cares about the deceased by comparison to oneself. In a case of extreme attachment, one’s own death becomes anticlimactic, not because one no longer values one’s life after the friend’s death, but because one truly believes that one’s death does not mean more to one than the death that has already happened. This should imply that one would have been willing to give one’s own life to save the friend (or at least to randomize the chance of death). This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 207 II Closely related to Ivan’s shock at the fact that he can die is the second characteristic of his death, namely, his shock at how something as important as death can come about at a particular time. It need not come from ﬁghting in a battle for some important cause but, rather, from something as trivial as a misstep on a ladder while decorating. It is this that adds one element of the absurd. It also helps explain his disbelief that he will die now—after all, nothing important enough has happened to merit being the cause of his death. Of course, Tolstoy arranges his story so that Ivan’s death results from his greed and concern with appearance and trivialities: he hits himself while arranging a curtain in his new home.7 Would a person who did not live as Ivan had avoid such an absurd end? Good people may also die of absurd missteps, even if not from those produced by (habitual) greed. But presumably, they realize that an absurd end is possible, and so are not shocked by it. (And they may be continually grateful that something of this sort has not yet happened, given that it always might.) Again, how one lives seems to have some impact on how one dies.8 III Once he knows that he will die, what are the sources of Ivan’s fear of death? (I am now speaking only of fear of death, not fear of the process of dying.) There are three: (1) death means no more of the goods of life (a) of the type he has been having and (b) of new types he might have; (2) it means extinction of himself; and (3) it means that (a) he has wasted all the life he had and (b) there will be no more chances to rectify that. He ﬁrst focuses on how he will have no more of the types of goods he has been having (1a), then he focuses on extinction (2), but ultimately it is the waste of life and no chance of rectifying this (3) that are his preeminent concerns with death. These are characteristics that Ivan believes his death will have. Ultimately, I am concerned to see if he is right about his own death and whether these characteristics attach to everyone’s death. But to begin with, I shall consider the relation between these three characteristics. Can we really distinguish the badness of having no more goods (1) from the badness of extinction (2)? I believe we can. One common philosophical view of why death is bad is that it interferes with having 7. Even more harshly, the landowner in “Master and Man” (in Tolstoy’s Short Fiction, ed. Michael R. Katz [New York: Norton, 1991]) dies when he does because he goes out in pursuit of more land, as does the character in “How much Land Does a Man Need?” (in Tolstoy, The Kreutzer Sonata). 8. Perhaps, however, in Tolstoy’s worldview, there is always a hidden meaning to what seems an absurd end, so that it is really a ﬁtting end. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 208 Ethics January 2003 more goods of life.9 (These goods might come to us if we lived, even if we have no plans for the future with which death would interfere. The completion of plans is just one sort of good with which death can interfere.) This is certainly one reason why death is bad, and it is involved in 1 and also in no rectiﬁcation (3b). But Ivan is also concerned that he will be nothing. (Although he exhibits the inability to grasp the very idea of his own extinction by confusingly asking, “Then where shall I be when I am no more?” [p. 42].) We can try to distinguish concern for one’s extinction from concern that one will not have more goods of life by imagining the Limbo Man.10 He is someone who could ensure that his life is longer or even never over without, however, thereby increasing the amount of goods (or ills) that he has in his life. He merely selects to spread out his conscious life over an indeﬁnite future, going into unconscious limbo (a coma state) in the intervening times. If this were possible, God could grant someone a much longer life or even immortality without granting him any more goods of life than a mortal being would have. Those whose concern with death is focused only on its limiting total goods will not ﬁnd the Limbo Man’s strategy helpful; those who are concerned with extinction—a conscious self not being all over—should ﬁnd it helpful. What leads Ivan to eventually focus on waste and no rectiﬁcation (3) is really his recognition that avoiding the end of the sort of “goods” he has been having (1a) would not be worthwhile in his case.11 He has been living a bad life—a living death, some have called it12—and more of the so-called goods he has been having would just be more of the bad. So, in his case, death is not bad because it prevents a continuation of goods he has been having; if it did only this, it would just prevent more bad things. One way to understand what Ivan realizes as he is dying (physically) is that he died (morally, emotionally, and spiritually) a long time ago. (The most remarkable passages conveying this insight are as follows: “And the longer it lasted the more deadly it became. ‘It is as if I had been going downhill while I imagined I was going up. . . . life was ebbing away from me’” [pp. 56–57]; “There is one bright spot 9. See Thomas Nagel’s “Death,” in his Mortal Questions (New York: Cambridge Uni versity Press, 1979). 10. For more on the Limbo Man and the distinction between 1 and 2, see F. M. Kamm, “Why Is Death Bad and Worse than Pre-natal Nonexistence?” Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 69 (1988): 161–64, and Morality, Mortality (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), vol. 1. 11. See esp. p. 56: “‘What is it you want?’ . . . ‘To live . . . ’ ‘How?’ . . . ‘as I used to . . . ’ The nearer he came to the present, the more worthless and doubtful were the joys.” 12. See John Bayley’s excerpt from his Tolstoy and the Novel (London: Chatto, 1966), reprinted in Katz, ed., pp. 420–23. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 209 there at the back, at the beginning of life, and afterwards all becomes blacker and blacker and proceeds more and more rapidly—in inverse ratio to the square of the distance from death” [p. 58]). This shows us that moral, emotional, and spiritual death can happen to someone without his knowing that it has happened. When Ivan is uncertain whether he is dying physically and no one in his own circle tells him the truth, his brother-in-law comes from outside and says, “Why, he’s a dead man! Look at his eyes—there’s no light in them” (p. 41). But there was no one in his life who remarked in this way on Ivan’s earlier (moral, emotional, and spiritual) death, since this was considered the normal course of events in his circle. The ﬁrst type of death and dying process can go undiagnosed for far longer than the physical death and it is very dangerous for that reason.13 If no more of the goods that one has been having (1a) were the only reason death is bad, death would not be bad for Ivan. Indeed, if only the prospect of death could make someone like Ivan reconsider the life he has been leading to see that it had not been right, and the prospect was inseparable from the actual occurrence of death, then the occurrence of death could be at least instrumentally good. That is, in Ivan’s case, it is not just that death will rob him of life but that the prospect of death and the process of dying are robbing him of pleasant illusions about his life. This is something we may dread about the process of dying, but it may have good aspects. Still, death would interfere with true goods of life that Ivan could now recognize and might seek if he lived on. So it is bad for reason 1b. However, there might be a new type of good with which death need not interfere (and which the prospect of death helps cause): Ivan’s ﬁnal insight or some conversion or rebirth before death. (I shall investigate this possibility in more detail below in discussing the process of dying.)14 Some people like Ivan may only have good in their lives by dying in the right way, in Tolstoy’s view. If they went on living (again, assuming that the prospect of death that might reform a person cannot be separated from death’s occurrence), they would only live bad lives, and that would be worse than a good death. It is because Ivan comes to believe (let us assume correctly) that his life has been trivial and nasty that he thinks death would not interfere with any goods he has been having. But death now would, if it interferes with his having some future life with real goods (i.e., leading a really good life), still imply that his whole life had been wasted. Further, as 13. In the movie The Sixth Sense, the physically dead who survive in some nonphysical state do not realize that they are dead. Tolstoy asks us to believe that something similar is true of Ivan and those in his social circle: they do not realize how “dead” they are. 14. See James Olney, “Experience, Metaphor, and Meaning: The Death of Ivan Ilych,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 31 (1972): 101–4. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 210 Ethics January 2003 he sees it at one point, it interferes with his rectifying for his so-far wasted life. (This is the waste and no rectiﬁcation of 3a and 3b.) Indeed, merely not having more future (real) goods seems to take a back seat in Ivan’s case to not being able (in having them) to rectify the past or at least rescue his life from being a total waste. If he could have had those future goods, his (extended) life would not have been as much a waste, and if he could have done certain things in the future, that might have made up for the past or even redeemed the errors of the past. (How future good could make up for the past or even redeem the past is an important question that I shall discuss only brieﬂy below.) The desire that his life not have been a waste becomes stronger than the desire that he not be extinct or even that he have a future with real goods per se. (One’s life not being a waste is a second-order property that supervenes on some of the real goods in it, presumably.)15 Given that his strongest desire is that his life not have been a waste, immortality per se (the absence of death) would not necessarily be a solution to what Ivan fears will be the consequence of death in his case. That is, what he comes to be afraid of most need not go away if he were immortal (and knew this about himself). For one could live immortally a trivial and nasty life. Though there would always be time to make one’s life not be a total waste, such a rescue need not necessarily take place. And it would be peculiar to think that if one has only a little bit of life, it does matter if one wastes it, but if one has an inﬁnite amount of life, it does not matter if one wastes it. Just because one can never waste it all (there is always more to waste), this does not mean that waste would not matter. Still, focusing on “waste” can be deceptive. To waste something (e.g., time) is not to make good use of it. If one thinks of a good life as a product—a ﬁxed amount of good—one could produce that product with more or less waste. For example, if one had a long time in which to produce the ﬁxed amount of good, one might waste a lot of time, and still produce the good. If one had a short time in which to produce the ﬁxed amount of good, one could do it if there is less waste. But if it was the product that was important, it might not matter that there was more waste of time in one life than in the other. If one immortally lives badly, there will be not only inefﬁcient squandering of resources but also no good product, and it is the absence of the good product that would be the import of saying that someone’s life is or was a waste 15. We can show that (i) desire for goods that might make one’s life not be a waste is separate from (ii) desire for more goods per se, by considering someone who knows that his life will not have been a waste and who still wants more goods. He does not want them for the purpose of rescuing his life from being a waste. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 211 in the sense that he wasted his life. That is, the resources were not used to produce the product.16 On the product view of waste, the problem is that you did not produce a product (your life was a waste). On the resource view of waste, the focus is on how many opportunities were squandered. Your life need not have been a waste even though you wasted a lot of it. But neither the “product” nor the “resource” view of waste is completely adequate. This is because it is important how we live each moment—not that we produce a ﬁxed product. Nor is it that if we waste a moment of time of which we are to have an inﬁnite number, its loss as a resource is what matters. What is important is that we should have been behaving differently at that point in time. It is important that we respond correctly all the time to the value or disvalue of persons, things, and events that surround us and are in us. This is the real reason why the person who lives immortally must still worry about whether his life at each moment is worthwhile. So, it is not true that if there is no death, and one will not be extinguished, and there is no end to the possibility of future real goods, that one need not care, even continually, about the content of one’s life. It is not just that in the absence of immortality one must focus on the secondary, partially compensating good of having lived well. No one should think, “I’m going to live forever; it does not matter how I live.” “So what if it is a waste, if it will last forever” is also not a correct motto.17 The latter motto suggests that extinction (2) is the worst part of death and most to be avoided, even at the expense of having a life full of bad things. But Tolstoy’s view, I think, is that it would be better to exchange immortal bad life for a mortal one that has good in it. The temptation is to read “Ivan Ilych” as though the prospect of death is necessary to make one think about the worth of one’s life and the possibility (or necessity) of death is what makes it necessary to live a good life.18 The suggestion is that people like Ivan, who do not believe that they will die, will not properly evaluate or take seriously the worth 16. I am, of course, focusing on a sense of “a wasted life” that involves someone wasting his life. Hence, the life’s having good effects on others through their efforts or by natural processes does not imply that the life was not a waste. If someone’s wasted life serves as a useful lesson to many people, this does not mean that his life was not a waste in the relevant sense. 17. When Woody Allen complains that life is full of misery, suffering, and pain, and, furthermore, it’s all over too soon, he may seem to gesture at a view behind the motto. But Allen’s quip merely says that extinction is worse than endless bad stuff; it leaves it open that one might court extinction in exchange for some good stuff, even though this means that death could then become bad both because we had no more goods of life (1) and because of extinction (2). 18. I mean “possibility” in the sense that one is uncertain whether one will have to die. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 212 Ethics January 2003 of their lives. But, I have argued, it is not the case that only if we die should we in fact be concerned with the way we are living. We neither need death in order to need to be rescued from a worthless life nor, I believe, is it true that only with the prospect of death would we be concerned with the way we live. There are many events and relationships in life that alert us to the importance of how we live. It is true that Ivan might have needed the prospect of death and (on the supposition that the prospect and reality could not be separated) the reality of death in order to be concerned with the real worth of his life; he needs death, on Tolstoy’s view, for the opportunity it gives him to be rescued.19 (How it might do this is investigated in more detail below.) But this does not mean that all who have been living as he has need death or even its prospect in order to be rescued. Nevertheless, it must be admitted that Ivan’s case makes one think of an asymmetry in the relation between the worth of one’s life and, on the one hand, life, and, on the other hand, death. If one believes that one is living a trivial life (when one could live a good one), one does not necessarily feel the need to leave life. That is, if one is to go on living life, one need not believe that one is living something good. But if we are to leave life, we think that we should leave something good. We may stay without having had, and even without the prospect of having, a justiﬁed life (though we should try for a justiﬁed life). But we should not leave—we should be locked into life—if we could not justify our life (when justiﬁcation is a possibility). So long as we do not close the production, there is not the same need to make a tally of what we have or will produce in order to go on. But if we are closing the production, we should make a tally. We should not bring the production to an end, eliminating any possibility of future improvement, until there is something sufﬁciently good left behind. So if we have not done a certain amount of good by t10 and do not think that we ever will, this does not mean that we are not justiﬁed in going on beyond t10, but it might interfere with not going on beyond t10. This asymmetry focuses on the instrumental role of living a worthwhile life, that is, whether we must live it in order to do something else—either to live on or leave life. Hence, I shall call it the Instrumental Asymmetry.20 19. Tolstoy’s anger toward people like Ivan increases in his later stories, e.g., in “How Much Land Does a Man Need?” For these people, death brings no conversion. These people, Tolstoy seems to think, deserve death rather than need it for the good its prospect can produce. 20. Is the asymmetry two sides of the same coin? For if one had to leave if one’s life was not justiﬁed, it could not be true that one should not leave if one’s life was not justiﬁed. But it is possible that one could appropriately go on without living a justiﬁed life, even if one did not need a justiﬁed life in order for it to be appropriate (in the sense of permissible) to leave. (The permissibility of leaving does not imply that it is desirable or required that one leave.) This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 213 I have been speaking of Ivan’s concern with wasting his life and how waste comes about if one lives a worthless life. In concluding this part of the discussion, I want to emphasize that we should distinguish the concern with waste from a concern with mere worthlessness of one’s life. Suppose that one has been living a life to be despaired of, but that it was the only life possible for human beings. Then there is no wasted life, because there was nothing else better to have been done. Here the thought of suicide, putting an end to a life that can only be bad, might be understandable (even if not necessary), rather than the fear that death will make impossible a worthwhile life. By contrast, if one has been living a life to be despaired of and there is and always was a better alternative, one should at least now try to live that alternative, and death may interfere with doing this. ( Just possibly, one might punish oneself for having wasted life so far by committing suicide, rather than altering one’s life. This would be the view of someone who thought that he did not deserve another chance after what he had wasted so far. Ivan never exhibits this frame of mind.) Now we come to our continuing question: would the things that I have said Ivan fears about death be present in the death of a person who had lived as he should (assuming he has lived as long as Ivan)? (I am still speaking only of death, not the process of dying.) Let us consider 1, 2, and 3. In the good person’s death, no more continuation of the sorts of goods he had been having (1a) as well as no more new sorts of goods (1b) would be present. Indeed, aspect 1a of death would actually be worse in the case of a good person than in Ivan’s, since death would prevent the continuation of real goods he had been having in the past, not trivial and nasty pursuits. However, the additional real goods to be gotten from living on are not needed as much by the good person as by Ivan, given that the good person will have had many of them already but Ivan will not, though the person who has lived as he should may deserve the future real goods more than Ivan. Waste (3) would not be present since the life of a good person would not have been a wasted one, nor will rectiﬁcation be needed. Extinction (2) will be present or absent for good and bad alike depending on whether there is life after death and such life is given to good and bad alike. Independently of this, Tolstoy may believe that extinction does not really occur or at least will not be a bad thing to happen for someone who lives correctly. This could be partially true if living correctly means investing oneself in others or values or projects outside oneself. For then his extinction could correctly be a minor matter to the person who dies, as he correctly cares most about something other than himself, and if this goes on, nothing very important happens to him when he dies. The view that physical death would not involve extinction at all, even if there were no afterlife, is most clearly conveyed in the death of the master This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 214 Ethics January 2003 in Tolstoy’s “Master and Man.” The master identiﬁes so completely with Nikita, his servant, that the master thinks that he will live (and so not be extinct) so long as Nikita does (p. 268). (Presumably, by transitivity, the master will also live so long as those through whom Nikita lives continue to live.)21 As I see it, Tolstoy’s view of how to live correctly is meant to eliminate or diminish the importance of extinction (2) and waste and no rectiﬁcation (3) as characteristics of death even if there were no afterlife, and to diminish the signiﬁcance of no more goods (1). IV What of the process of dying that Ivan lives through, aside from death itself? Ivan is a judge by profession and my interpretation of the penultimate part of the story is that in his process of dying, Ivan is putting himself on trial. (From a religious perspective, God will be one’s ultimate judge. But it may be that until one believes in that judgment, one’s own judgment of oneself is especially crucial.) However, as I see it, there are two trials that should be distinguished (though Tolstoy never explicitly says this). The initial trial begins when an inner voice that seems separate from Ivan questions him, and he responds. (“‘What is it you want?’ . . . ‘To live . . .’ ‘How?’ . . . ‘as I used to . . .’” [p. 56].) The inner voice is like an impartial judge who prompts Ivan to testify in his own case and leads him to see truths about his life (that I have discussed in Sec. III). Suppose that a trial shows that one has not lived as one should have, one comes to realize it, and one is dying. What should one do? At one point, as we have seen, Ivan believes that he is in this situation and that he has lost out on everything worth having and there is no possibility of rectiﬁcation. This is when he suffers extreme mental agony. If he were to die, the agony would end. So perhaps suicide or at least wishing for death is the thing to do. After all, his belief that his life has been wrong and that there is no rectiﬁcation possible cause his agony. 21. An oddity in this ending is that while the master believes that he will live if Nikita does, he also believes that in dying he is going to meet God. He then would be in two different places at the same time, if we take things literally. In “Master and Man,” both Nikita and the Master think that it is only the Master who has something big to lose if he loses his life. In truth, the Master’s life is not (on Tolstoy’s view) worth living, so he would not lose much in losing that life, but his life can be saved from worthlessness if he dies in a certain way (e.g., by saving Nikita). It should be noted that identiﬁcation with others who go on living ignores another common form of detachment from self: identiﬁcation with those who have already died. Such identiﬁcation cannot work to reduce one’s concern with death by attaching one to continuing life. Rather, it shows that any form of intense identiﬁcation that makes one think less about oneself and also makes one willing to contemplate the previously unthinkable—giving up one’s life for that with which one identiﬁes—can reduce to some degree the importance for oneself of death. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 215 So, why should he still fear death ending this agony? Why doesn’t he see death as a release? This is the question with which I shall be concerned here. For one thing, Ivan still fears extinction (2), which he envisions as “the black hole.” When he is in a position to see the truth about his past life and suffer from it, he is also in a position to see other truths, for example, that extinction is really coming. Rather than accept these two truths, he struggles against them both. But, Tolstoy says, Ivan resists death at this point because he tries again to justify his past life, rather than from concern with extinction per se. Hence there are two patterns that are candidates to represent what is going on after the “trial verdict.” In pattern 1, Ivan is in agony from his awareness of the truth about his life. He could avoid this agony by dying, but he fears the black hole. This leads him to ﬁnd another route to avoid the agony: change his beliefs about his life. In pattern 2, he is afraid of the black hole in itself, but he is primarily afraid of dying without being able to justify the worth of his life. In pattern 2, changing his beliefs about his life is not seen as a necessary alternative if he is to stay alive instead of going into the hole. Rather, changing his beliefs about his life is necessary if he is to be able to go into the dreaded hole. Pattern 2 is a more accurate representation of Ivan’s state of mind, I think. Ivan resists death totally because he feels he cannot die until he knows that his life was good. Ivan is a judge by profession, but possibly everyone will put himself on trial and resist leaving until he knows that his life has been good. Tolstoy is warning us that when someone must die, his primary concern will not be with death per se but with how he has lived his life. (I shall consider below whether a trial is necessarily a part of the dying process of a person who has lived as he should.) If Tolstoy is right, then if one is offered an ignoble means of avoiding death on one occasion, one should remember that, at least as long as one remains mortal, one will eventually come to be concerned more with having used those ignoble means than with the temporary continuation of life that their use made possible. Ivan’s double resistance—to death and to the truth about his life—causes more suffering than the awareness of the two truths, according to Tolstoy. The most suffering now is caused by not getting into the black hole in the right way, and what impedes getting in in the right way is the attempt to justify his past life. Ivan has a device in him (the inner voice) that has gotten him to the truth but he lacks, as yet, anything that helps stabilize him in the face of the truth. If we interpret all this in the light of the trial metaphor, we can see that Ivan is now in a second trial in an Appeals Court. He is appealing the initial verdict that his life was no good. The problem is that at this second stage he is no longer responsive to an impartial element inside himself. He is trying to bend This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 216 Ethics January 2003 the truth so that he gets a result more pleasing to himself. The defense, not an impartial judge, is running the Appeals trial. What someone in Ivan’s situation should be doing, according to Tolstoy, is at least dying right if he could not live right. But Ivan is not doing this either, and that becomes a further source of his suffering. The problem is not that his dying process includes the ﬁrst trial, it is how he reacts to its verdict. We should, I think, be more precise about the ﬁrst and second trials. Consider ﬁgure 1. It shows that there are two dimensions: what one’s life was actually like and what one believes about it. To know that one’s life was good, it must actually have been good and one must have something like a justiﬁed belief that it was good. (Figure 1 cuts corners as it does not represent the element of justiﬁcation of one’s belief.) But one’s life could be good without one knowing this. There is a difference between (a) refusing to leave life because one’s life has not been good (and one knows it), (b) refusing to leave life because one does not know whether it has been good or bad, and (c) refusing to leave life until one knows that one’s life has been good. Let me try to make the signiﬁcance of these distinctions clearer. The Instrumental Asymmetry discussed above says that one’s life should have amounted to something worthwhile in order for it to be permissible to leave. According to the Instrumental Asymmetry, if the life was good, it will be acceptable to leave, whether one knows that it was good or not. One’s life will have either been good or not been good already, independent of one’s beliefs or knowledge about it. Knowing that one’s life has been good can arguably make one’s life be better.22 But resisting death in order to evaluate one’s life will not, by itself, make it have been a good life. In particular, if the life was not good, resistance to its ending in order to know about this will not make it a good life. So, it might be said, why not end the agony of worrying about whether one’s life was good and just die? It is possibly because even a bad life has added to it a good component if one knows the truth about oneself, at least if one has an Fig. 1 22. Alan Wood emphasized this point. This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 217 appropriate reaction to this truth, for example, not joy but sadness or even agony. On this view, Ivan’s life is more worthwhile because he responds with agony to the verdict. That his life becomes more worthwhile does not, of course, mean that it is necessarily a better life for him to live. The life of a saint is worthwhile, but not necessarily because it is good for the person who lives it. (This is one reason why, though it would be wrong to interfere with painful personal growth when it is in progress, one would not necessarily encourage it when it is not spontaneous.) Further, the Instrumental Asymmetry says that it makes sense to resist the ending of a production when it has been bad, even though one may go on living if the production has been bad. But in order to know whether one should resist in this way, one needs to know whether one’s life really was bad. This is one reason to hold the ﬁrst trial and not just let death come, letting the chips fall where they may based on the actual merit of one’s life, independent of one’s knowledge of its merit. So the strategy here is to resist death in order to get knowledge to know whether one should resist further. (This is b above.) However, at the Appeals Stage, Ivan is not resisting death for these reasons. In particular, he is not resisting because he has not yet done a tally or because he knows that his life has been bad and it must not end in this state. Rather, he is resisting death because he is busy appealing the initial verdict. He wants to be able to prove that his life was good, even though if it were good it would not really matter very much for the acceptability of his leaving that he know it. (So he is not thinking that he must know whether his life was bad in order to resist death if his life was bad.) Why is having the knowledge that it is good important? His most important concern is that his life actually have been good. If the knowledge that the life was good were not only a component of a good life but a necessary component, he would have to know that it is good in order for his life to be good. But knowledge does not seem necessary. Still, it seems quite understandable to want to know if what one most wanted to happen did happen, and it can also make the good life better to know about it. So Ivan’s case shows that we not only want our life to have been good, but in the end we will want to know that it was good before we can leave in peace. (Yet, the desire to know is still a separable desire, as shown by the fact that one could want to know even if one did not care to make one’s life better by knowing. This is also shown by the fact that if someone wants to know whether x is so, primarily because he is concerned that x be so, he should be willing to make the following bargain: decrease the probability of his knowing that x is so, if this will increase the probability that x is so.) Ivan’s case has another element in it, however. If he does not get the knowledge that his life was good, he will not just be without any beliefs about his life. He has already had a verdict in the ﬁrst court, This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 218 Ethics January 2003 and this verdict says that his life was bad. He is in agony. He wants the agony to end. He might end it by thinking, “The verdict could be wrong. What I most want is that it be wrong, not that I know that it is wrong. My knowing will not affect whether it was wrong or not, so I’ll forget about knowing.” But if Ivan has done a careful tally the ﬁrst time, he needs more than the possibility that it might be wrong to end the agony. He needs evidence that it was wrong in order to end the agony. Or alternatively, as mentioned above, if he died, the agony would end as well. But he—and presumably we all—would want agony from our doubts about our life to be relieved by knowledge of the worth of our lives, not just by death that terminates our ability to agonize. We can only know that life has been good if it was actually good (and we can come to have justiﬁed belief in this). So if Ivan were to know that his life is good, this would be a sign that it was really good. The truth he is concerned with will be a cause of his knowledge of it, and so a cause of his agony stopping. By contrast, if his agony stops because he dies, this has nothing to do with that which he most wants to be true—that he had a good life—being true. So the primary reason why death is not an appropriate escape from his agony about his life is not that he fears the black hole. It is that he primarily wants his agony to be unjustiﬁed by the facts about his life, and dying cannot make that be the case. He wants the agony to go away because he has come to know that it is unjustiﬁed, and dying cannot do this. However, if we want to have the good news on Appeal, we also risk getting bad news instead, namely, that one’s life was not any good. And according to the Instrumental Asymmetry, this should set up a resistance to dying. But this is not what happens to Ivan, in part because in his case resistance is useless; he must die now. What actually happens after Appeal shows that there is another way to react to the knowledge of the badness of one’s life besides resisting death, and another reason—besides resisting death (if the life is bad), quenching curiosity, or ending agony—to try to get the knowledge about the goodness or badness of one’s life before dying. This additional reason is related to what has already been said about self-knowledge adding a worthwhile component to a bad life but goes beyond it. For those who do not have the option of not leaving life, knowledge can make some rectiﬁcation possible when it seemed too late for this. Here we are also broaching the issue of how Ivan can be rescued. What happens to Ivan is that something outside of his will pushes him closer to death, and death turns out not to involve meeting a black hole but a light of revelation.23 It involves not only a permanent com 23. The light may be due to nothing more than (what we now know is) some increase in a brain chemical before death. But, in the story, Ivan does not just bask in serotonin This content downloaded from 188.72.127.52 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 01:27:08 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Kamm Rescuing Ivan Ilych 219 mitment to the truth that his life was not lived right, but also a correction to what he mistakenly believed was also a truth that caused a great measure of his suffering: that there is no more possibility of rectifying the waste of his life. If he does not resist the two truths—about the lack of worth of his past life and about death being irresistible—the third belief (no possibility of rectiﬁcation) turns out not to be true at all. So if he had not come to know that his life was bad, there could not have been this possibility of rectiﬁcation. The rectiﬁcation comes not merely in dying without resistance to the truth about himself. For to accept without any backsliding that his life was wrong is for him to accept a new set of values by which it fails. So it involves leaving behind the values of the old Ivan. One sign of this is