The central problem of political theory is to reconcile the standpoint of the collectivity with the standpoint of the individual. The problem is not approached as a question about the relation between the individual and society; in essence and origin it is a question about each individual's relation to himself. The impersonal standpoint in each of us produces a powerful demand for universal impartiality and equality, while the personal standpoint gives rise to individualistic motives and requirements, which present obstacles to the pursuit and realization of such ideals. This essay deals with what I believe to be the central problem of political theory. Rather than proposing a solution to it, I shall try to explain what it is, and why a solution is so difficult to achieve. This result need not be thought of pessimistically, since the recognition of a serious obstacle is always a necessary condition of progress, and I believe there is hope that in the future, political and social institutions may develop which continue our unsteady progress toward moral equality, without ignoring the stubborn realities of human nature. My belief is not just that all social and political arrangements so far devised are unsatisfactory. That might be due to the failure of all actual systems to realize an ideal that we should all recognize as correct. But there is a deeper problem—not merely practical, but theoretical: We do not yet possess an acceptable political ideal, for reasons which belong to moral and political philosophy. The unsolved problem is the familiar one of reconciling the standpoint of the collectivity with the standpoint of the individual; but I want to approach it not primarily as a question about the relation between the individual and society, but in essence and origin as a question about each individual's relation to himself. This reflects a conviction that ethics, and the ethical basis of political theory, have to be understood as arising from a division in each individual between two standpoints, the personal and the impersonal. The latter represents the claims of the collectivity and gives them their force for each individual. If it did not exist, there would be no morality, only the clash, compromise, and occasional convergence of individual perspectives. It is because a human being does not occupy only his own point of view that each of us is susceptible to the claims of others through private and public morality. Any social arrangement governing the relations among individuals, or between the individual and the collective, depends on a corresponding balance of forces within the self—its image in microcosm. That image is the relation, for each individual, between the personal and impersonal standpoints, on which the social arrangement depends and which it requires of us. If an arrangement is to claim the support of those living under it—if it is to claim legitimacy, in other words—then it must rely on or call into existence some form of reasonable integration of the elements of their naturally divided selves. The division is rough, and spans a great deal of subordinate complexity, but I believe it is indispensable in thinking about the subject. The hardest problems of political theory are conflicts within the individual, and no external solution will be adequate which does not deal with them at their source. The impersonal standpoint in each of us produces, I shall claim, a powerful demand for universal impartiality and equality, while the personal standpoint gives rise to individualistic motives and requirements which present obstacles to the pursuit and realization of such ideals. The recognition that this is true of everyone then presents the impersonal standpoint with further questions about what is required to treat such persons with equal regard, and this in turn presents the individual with further conflict. The same problems arise with respect to the morality of personal conduct, but I shall argue that their treatment must be extended to political theory, where the relations of mutual support or conflict between political institutions and individual motivation are all-important. It emerges that a harmonious combination of an acceptable political ideal and acceptable standards of personal morality is very hard to come by. Another way of putting the problem, therefore, is this: When we try to discover reasonable moral standards for the conduct of individuals and then try to integrate them with fair standards for the assessment of social and political institutions, there seems no satisfactory way of fitting the two together. They respond to opposing pressures which cause them to break apart. To a considerable extent, political institutions and their theoretical justifications try to externalize the demands of the impersonal standpoint. But they have to be staffed and supported and brought to life by individuals for whom the impersonal standpoint coexists with the personal, and this has to be reflected in their design. My claim is that the problem of designing institutions that do justice to the equal importance of all persons, without making unacceptable demands on individuals, has not been solved— and that this is so partly because for our world the problem of the right relation between the personal and impersonal standpoints within each individual has not been solved. Most people feel this on reflection. We live in a world of spiritually sickening economic and social inequality, a world whose progress toward the acknowledgment of common standards of toleration, individual liberty and human development has been depressingly slow and unsteady. There are sometimes dramatic improvements, and recent events in Eastern Europe must give pause to all those, like myself, who in response to the dominant events of this century have cultivated a defensive pessimism about the prospects of humanity. But we really do not know how to live together. The professed willingness of civilized persons to slaughter each other by the millions in a nuclear war now appears to be subsiding, as the conflicts of political conviction which fueled it lose their sharpness. But even in the developed world, and certainly in the world taken as a whole, the problems which generated the great political and moral rift between democratic capitalism and authoritarian communism have not been solved by the utter competitive failure of the latter. Communism may have been defeated in Europe, and we may live to celebrate its fall in Asia as well, but that does not mean that democratic capitalism is the last word in human social arrangements. At this historical moment it is worth remembering that communism owes its existence in part to an ideal of equality which remains appealing however great the crimes committed and the economic disasters produced in its name. Democratic societies have not found a way to contend with that ideal: it is a problem for the old democracies of the West, and it will be a very serious problem for the emerging democracies which succeed the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, and perhaps elsewhere. Political philosophy is not going to transform this situation, but it has its role, for some of the apparently practical problems of political life have theoretical and moral sources. Moral convictions drive political choices, and the absence of moral agreement, if severe, can be far more divisive than a mere conflict of interests. Anyone who is inclined to doubt the connection of political theory with reality cannot hold out against the events now unfolding: moral and theoretical battles are being fought across the globe, sometimes with real tanks. One should think of political theory as an enterprise of discovery—the discovery of human possibilities whose coming to actuality is encouraged and assisted by the discovery itself. That is certainly how most of the traditional figures of political theory have seen it. They were in the business of imagining the moral future, with the hope of contributing to its realization. But this inevitably carries the risk of utopianism, and that problem is an important aspect of our subject. A theory is utopian in the pejorative sense if it describes a form of collective life that humans, or most humans, could not lead and could not come to be able to lead through any feasible process of social and mental development. It may have value as a possibility for a few people, or as an admirable but unattainable ideal for others. But it cannot be offered as a general solution to the main question of political theory: How should we live together in society? Worse still, when what is described is not in fact motivationally possible, the illusion of its possibility may motivate people nevertheless to try to institute it, with results that are quite different. Societies are constantly trying to beat people into shape because they stubbornly fail to conform to some preconceived pattern of human possibility. Political theory is in this sense an empirical discipline whose hypotheses give hostages to the future, and whose experiments can be very costly.1 But while the avoidance of utopianism is important, it is no more important than the avoidance of hard-nosed realism, its diametrical opposite. To be sure, a theory that offers new possibilities must be aware of the danger that they may be purely imaginary. The real nature of humans and human motivation always has to be an essential part of the subject: Pessimism is always in order, and we have been given ample reason to fear human nature. But we shouldn't be too tied down by limits derived from the baseness of actual motives or by excessive pessimism about the possibility of human 1 As Hannah Arendt once said, "It is true that you can't make an omelet without breaking eggs; but you can break a great many eggs without making an omelet." improvement. It is important to try to imagine the next step, even before we have come close to implementing the best conceptions already available. In this enterprise the use of moral intuition is inevitable, and should not be regretted. To trust our intuitions, particularly those that tell us something is wrong even though we don't know exactly what would be right, we need only believe that our moral understanding extends farther than our capacity to spell out the principles which underlie it. Intuition can be corrupted by custom, self-interest, or commitment to a theory, but it need not be, and often a person's intuitions will provide him with evidence that his own moral theory is missing something, or that the arrangements he has been brought up to find natural are really unjust. Intuitive dissatisfaction is an essential resource in political theory. It can tell us that something is wrong, without necessarily telling us how to fix it. It is a reasonable response to even the most ideal versions of current political practice, and I believe it is the correct response also at the level of theory: It tells us, not surprisingly, that we have not yet arrived at the truth. In that way it can help us to cultivate a healthy dissatisfaction with the familiar, without falling into utopianism of the uncritical sort. I believe that the clash of personal and impersonal standpoints is one of the most pressing problems revealed in this way. If we cannot, through moral theory and institutional design, reconcile an impartial concern for everyone with a view of how each individual can reasonably be expected to live, then we cannot hope to defend the general acceptability of any political order. These problems of integration come with our humanity, and we cannot expect them ever to disappear. But the attempt to deal with them has to be part of any political theory that can claim to be realistic. What makes this task so difficult is that our ultimate aim in political theory should be to approach as nearly as possible to unanimity, at some level, in support of the basic framework of those political institutions which are maintained by force and into which we are born. Such a claim may seem extravagant or unintelligible, since lack of unanimity is the essence of politics; but I shall try to defend it, and to explain how it is related to Kantian ethics and to the hypothetical contractualism which is its political expression. The pure ideal of political legitimacy is that the use of state power should be capable of being authorized by each citizen—not in direct detail but through acceptance of the principles, institutions, and procedures which determine how that power will be used. This requires the possibility of unanimous agreement at some sufficiently high level, for if there are citizens who can legitimately object to the way state power is used against them or in their name, the state is not legitimate. To accept such unanimity as an ideal while respecting the complex realities of human motivation and practical reason is inevitably frustrating, but in my conception that is what presents political theory with its task. We must try both to give the condition a morally sensible interpretation and to see how far actual institutions might go toward meeting it. It is a task which cannot be postponed till the millenium, when conflicts have disappeared and all share a common goal. The secular form of that seductive and dangerous vision, which condemns the aim of even idealized agreement under existing circumstances, and insists on struggle and the pursuit of victory so long as there are classes whose interests conflict, has been Marx's most conspicuous moral legacy to the world. Harmony is reserved for a future which will be achieved only by eschewing harmony for political war between irreconcilable interests in the present. This view should be rejected, and the pursuit of human equality decisively separated from it. The aim of idealized agreement has a role at all stages in the pursuit of an improved human condition, even if full justice is far away. Force will always be necessary if that aim is not widely enough shared, but it is a disaster to exclude the aim from political morality until history has proceeded by other means to that mythical terminus at which it will be effortlessly achieved. 2 Two Standpoints Each of us begins with a set of concerns, desires, and interests of our own, and each of us can recognize that the same is true of others. We can then remove ourselves in thought from our particular position in the world and think simply of all those people, without singling out as I the one we happen to be. From this abstracted impersonal standpoint, the content and character of different individual standpoints remain unchanged. The impersonal standpoint plays an essential role in the evaluation of political institutions. Any political theory that aspires to moral decency must try to devise and justify a form of institutional life, which answers to the real strength of impersonal values while recognizing that they are not all we have to reckon with. Most of our experience of the world, and most of our desires, belong to our individual points of view: We see things from here, so to speak. But we are also able to think about the world in abstraction from our particular position in it—in abstraction from who we are. It is possible to abstract much more radically than that from the contingencies of the self. For example, in pursuit of the kind of objectivity needed in the physical sciences, we abstract even from our humanity. But nothing further than abstraction from our identity (that is, who we are) enters into ethical theory.2 By performing this deed of abstraction we occupy what I shall call the impersonal standpoint. From that position, the content and character of the different individual standpoints one can survey remain unchanged: One has set aside only the fact that a particular standpoint is one's own, if any of them is. It isn't that one doesn't know; one just omits this fact from the description of the situation. A great deal emerges from our capacity to view the world in this way, including the great enterprise of trying to discover the objective nature of reality. But since objectivity also has its significance with respect to values and the justification of conduct, the impersonal standpoint plays an essential role in the evaluation of political institutions. Ethics and political theory begin when from the impersonal standpoint we focus on the raw data provided by the individual desires, interests, projects, attachments, allegiances and plans of life that define the personal points of view of the multitude of distinct individuals, ourselves included. What happens at that point is that we recognize some of these things to have impersonal value. Things do not simply cease to matter when viewed impersonally, and we are forced to recognize that they matter not only to particular individuals or groups. I have argued before, and I continue to believe, that it is impossible to avoid this consequence if one juxtaposes personal and impersonal standpoints toward one's own life. You cannot sustain an impersonal indifference to the things in your life which matter to you personally: some of the most important have to be regarded as mattering, 2 I have discussed the wider topic in The View From Nowhere. Each of us begins with a set of concerns, desires, and interests of his own, and each of us can recognize that the same is true of others. We can then remove ourselves in thought from our particular position in the world and think simply of all those people, without singling out as I the one we happen to be. period, so that others besides yourself have reason to take them into account. But since the impersonal standpoint does not single you out from anyone else, the same must be true of the values arising in other lives. If you matter impersonally so does everyone. We can usefully think of the values that go into the construction of a political theory as being revealed in a series of four stages, each of which depends on a moral response to an issue posed by what was revealed at the previous stage. At the first stage, the basic insight that appears from the impersonal standpoint is that everyone's life matters, and no one is more important than anyone else. This does not mean that some people may not be more important in virtue of their greater value for others. But at the baseline of value in the lives of individuals, from which all higher-order inequalities of value must derive, everyone counts the same. For a given quantity of whatever it is that's good or bad—suffering or happiness or fulfillment or frustration—its intrinsic impersonal value doesn't depend on whose it is. There are so many people one can barely imagine it, and their aims and interests interfere with one another; but what happens to each of them is enormously important—as important as what happens to you. The importance of their lives to them, if we really take it in, ought to be reflected in the importance their lives are perceived to have from the impersonal standpoint, even if not all elements of those lives will be accorded an impersonal value corresponding to its personal value to the individual whose life it is—a qualification I leave aside for the moment. Given this enormous multitude of things that matter impersonally, values positive and negative pointing in every conceivable direction, the problem for the impersonal standpoint is to determine how the elements should be combined and conflicts among them resolved, so that we can evaluate alternatives that affect different individuals differently in ways that matter to them. The response to this problem is the second stage in the generation of ethics from its raw material in personal value. I won't try to defend even a partial solution yet, but my belief is that the right form of impersonal regard for everyone is an impartiality among individuals that is egalitarian not merely in the sense that it counts them all the same as inputs to some combinatorial function, but in the sense that the function itself gives preferential weight to improvements in the lives of those who are worse off as against adding to the advantages of those better off—though all improvements will count positively to some degree. This is obviously related to the egalitarian element in Rawls's theory of social justice, but I believe something of the kind is true in ethics more generally. I believe also that the degree of preference to the worst off depends not just on their position relative to the better off, but also on how badly off they are, absolutely. Alleviation of urgent needs and serious deprivation has particularly strong importance in the acceptable resolution of conflicts of interest.3 We are talking now about how things appear from an entirely impersonal standpoint, one it would be natural to take up if we were looking from outside at a situation to which we were personally unconnected. The point is that we can also adopt this stance 3 See David Wiggins, “Claims of Need.” by abstraction toward situations in which we are involved, either personally or by connection with someone else. If we ask ourselves, considering all the lives affected, what would be best, or how to determine which of several alternatives would be better, we are pulled toward the conclusion that what happens to anyone matters the same as if it had happened to anyone else, that the elimination of the worst sufferings and deprivations matters most, that improvements at higher levels matter gradually less, and that at roughly equivalent levels of well-being, larger quantities of improvement or the reverse and larger numbers of individuals matter more.4 This is at least consistent with some familiar moral feelings. When we survey the actual world from the impersonal standpoint, its sufferings press in upon us: The alleviation of misery, ignorance, and powerlessness, and the elevation of most of our fellow human beings to a minimally decent standard of existence, seem overwhelmingly important, and the first requirement of any social or political arrangement would seem to be its likelihood of contributing to this goal. That is the clear impersonal judgment as to what matters most—the judgment one would make if one were observing the world from outside. And if one were actually a powerful and benevolent outsider, dispensing benefits to the inhabitants of the world, one would probably try to produce the best result by the impartial and egalitarian measure I have sketched. However, the story does not stop here, because neither ethics nor political theory have as their aim to provide advice to a powerful and benevolent outsider capable of affecting the welfare of human beings. They aim rather to advise human beings themselves what to do, either as individuals or as the creators, supporters, and inhabitants of social and political institutions. The results depend on the capacity of persons to occupy the impersonal standpoint by abstraction even when they are part of the situation being considered. But that is not the only standpoint they occupy. The raw material from which ethics begins—the personal aims, interests, and desires of individuals that the impersonal standpoint comprehends—remains fully present as a part of each individual's point of view. Often the personal standpoint also involves strong personal allegiance to particular communities of interest or conviction or emotional identification, larger than those defined by family or friendship, but still far less than universal. This large collection of diverse but essentially perspectival motives, ranging from self-interest to national solidarity, forms the other side of the broad mental conflict with which political theory must deal. It is clear that in most people, the coexistence of the personal standpoint with the values deriving from the initial judgment of the impersonal standpoint produces a division of the self. From his own point of view within the world each person, with his particular concerns and attachments, is extremely important to himself, and is situated at the center of a set of concentric circles of rapidly diminishing identification with others. But from the impersonal standpoint which he can also occupy, so is everyone else: 4 This means that we can make evaluative comparisons among alternatives that are better for some individuals and worse for others. Two different Pareto-optimal arrangements may be compared, and one found to be better, even though each of them is worse for somebody: The better alternative need not be better or at least as good for everybody. Everyone's life matters as much as his does, and his matters no more than anyone else's. These two attitudes are not easy to combine, particularly (but not only) for someone who is rather well off in a world in which most others are much worse off, with the result that from the impersonal standpoint, their needs are much more urgent than his. But if an ethical or political theory is to tell people how they should live, it must work with this juxtaposition of standpoints, and it must try to give an answer which is generally valid, and which everyone can acknowledge to be so. Of course a limiting possibility is that the values I have described as emerging from the impersonal standpoint should be dominant, at the most basic level of justification, whenever they conflict with more personal values. There is a venerable tradition in ethics, fully developed by utilitarians, according to which we should attempt to become, so far as possible, instruments for the realization of those impartial values that appear from the impersonal standpoint—living, in effect, as if we were under the direction of an impartial benevolent spectator of the world in which we appear as one among billions. But this radical claim would have to be defended, it cannot simply be assumed; and I shall defend the alternative view that the personal standpoint must be taken into account directly in the justification of any ethical or political system which humans can be expected to live by. This is an ethical and not merely a practical claim. But it will not be a solution to the ethical problem if the two standpoints are simply left to fight it out or reach some kind of individual accommodation within each person. Instead, this situation of conflict must itself be regarded as presenting a further problem for ethical and political theory—a new set of data for which a theory must be constructed. The response to that problem is the third stage in the generation of ethics, and it is the point at which ethics must assume a Kantian form. That is, it must go beyond the question "What can we all agree would be best, impersonally considered?" to address the further question "What, if anything, can we all agree that we should do, given that our motives are not merely impersonal?" That is how we reach the demand for ideal unanimity mentioned earlier, and the attendant doubts as to whether it can be met. If it were not for fear of the charge of multiplying standpoints beyond necessity, I would be tempted to call the point of view from which this question is asked the Kantian standpoint, because it attempts to see things simultaneously from each individual's point of view and to arrive at a form of motivation which they can all share, instead of simply replacing the individual perspectives by an impersonal one reached by stepping outside them all—as happens in the attitude of pure impartial benevolence. But perhaps I can refer to it instead as the Kantian development of the impersonal standpoint. What the impersonal standpoint generates at the first and second stages is a massive impartial addition to each individual's values without any indication of how this is to be combined with the personal values that were already there. The individual is of course counted as one among the many whose life is seen to have value from the impersonal standpoint, but that does not make his special personal interest in his own life go away. This is, I think, an acutely uncomfortable position. There is no obvious way of doing justice to the demands of both these perspectives at the same time—for example, by construing them as subordinate aspects of a single, higher-order evaluative system. Yet fulfillment of the one will almost inevitably clash with fulfillment of the other. That may be true even of the worst off who are most favored by an egalitarian impartiality, since their individual interests may not correspond to what would serve the interests of their fellows. So each of us, after the results of the first stage of impersonal evaluation have been assimilated, is likely to find himself severely torn. The question is, how can we put ourselves back together? The political problem, as Plato believed, must be solved within the individual soul if it is to be solved at all. This does not mean that the solution will not deal with interpersonal relations and public institutions. But it means that such "external" solutions will be valid only if they give expression to an adequate response to the division of the self, conceived as a problem for each individual. Something more than the original attitude of impartiality will be required to deal with this issue, even when we think of it from the impersonal standpoint. Impartiality alone could only add the anxieties of inner conflict to the set of human ills, and include their reduction among its aims for everyone. But this would leave the problem essentially unchanged for particular individuals whose more personal aims conflicted with the collective good thus redefined. What is needed instead is some general method of resolving the inner conflict that can be applied universally and that is acceptable to everyone in light of the universality of that conflict. But here the values universally recognized will have a different form, specifying what in light of the full complement of factors it is reasonable for each person to do and want, rather than what results are better or worse. The idea of what is reasonable, which will play a significant part in this discussion, is the object of a Kantian judgment: It is what