CHAPTER I. JUSTICE AS FAIRNESS In this introductory chapter I sketch some of the main ideas of the theory of justice I wish to develop. The exposition is informal and intended to prepare the way for the more detailed arguments that follow. Unavoidably there is some overlap between this and later discussions. I begin by describing the role of justice in social cooperation and with a brief account of the primary subject of justice, the basic structure of society. I then present the main idea of justice as fairness, a theory of justice that generalizes and carries to a higher level of abstraction the traditional conception of the social contract. The compact of society is replaced by an initial situation that incorporates certain procedural constraints on arguments designed to lead to an original agreement on principles of justice. I also take up, for purposes of clariﬁcation and contrast, the classical utilitarian and intuitionist conceptions of justice and consider some of the differences between these views and justice as fairness. My guiding aim is to work out a theory of justice that is a viable alternative to these doctrines which have long dominated our philosophical tradition. 1. THE ROLE OF JUSTICE 1. The Role of Justice Justice is the ﬁrst virtue of social institutions, as truth is of systems ofthought. A theory however elegant and economical must be rejected or revised if it is untrue; likewise laws and institutions no matter how efﬁ cient and well-arranged must be reformed or abolished if they are unjust. Each person possesses an inviolability founded on justice that even the welfare of society as a whole cannot override. For this reason justice denies that the loss of freedom for some is made right by a greater good shared by others. It does not allow that the sacriﬁces imposed on a few are outweighed by the larger sum of advantages enjoyed by many. Therefore in a just society the liberties of equal citizenship are taken as settled; 3 the rights secured by justice are not subject to political bargaining or to the calculus of social interests. The only thing that permits us to acquiesce in an erroneous theory is the lack of a better one; analogously, an injustice is tolerable only when it is necessary to avoid an even greater injustice. Being ﬁrst virtues of hum an activities, truth and justice are uncompromising.These propositions seem to express our intuitive conviction of the primacy of justice. No doubt they are expressed too strongly. In any event I wish to inquire whether these contentions or others similar to them are sound, and if so how they can be accounted for. To this end it is necessary to work out a theory of justice in the light of which these assertions can be interpreted and assessed. I shall begin by considering the role of the principles of justice. Let us assume, to ﬁx ideas, that a society is a more or less self-sufﬁcient association of persons who in their relations to one another recognize certain rules of conduct as binding and who for the most part act in accordance with them. Suppose further that these rules specify a system of cooperation designed to advance the good of those taking part in it. Then, although a society is a cooperative venture for mutual advantage, it is typically marked by a conﬂict as well as by an identity of interests. There is an iden tity of interests since social coopera-tion makes possible a better life for all than any would have if each were to live solely by his own efforts. There is a conﬂict of interests since persons are not indifferent as to how the greater beneﬁts produced by their collaboration are distributed, for in order to pursue their ends they each prefer a larger to a lesser share. A set of principles is required for choosing among the various social arrangements which determine this division of advantages and for underwriting an agreement on the proper distributive shares. These principles are the principles of social justice: they provide a way of assigning rights and duties in the basic institutions of society and they deﬁne the appropriate distribution of the beneﬁts and burdens of social cooperation. Now let us say that a society is well-ordered when it is not only designed to advance the good of its members but when it is also effec tively regulated by a public conception of justice. That is, it is a society in which (1) everyone accepts and knows that the others accept the same principles of justice, and (2) the basic social institutions generally satisfy and are generally known to satisfy these principles. In this case while men may put forth excessive demands on one another, they nevertheless acknowledge a common point of view from which their claims may be adjudicated. If men’s inclination to self-interest makes their vigilance 4Justice as Fairness against one another necessary, their public sense of justice makes their secure association together possible. Among individuals with disparate aims and purposes a shared conception of justice establishes the bonds of civic friendship; the general desire for justice limits the pursuit of other ends. One may think of a public conception of justice as constituting the fundamental charter of a well-ordered human association.Existing societies are of course seldom well-ordered in this sense, for what is just and unjust is usually in dispute. Men disagree about which principles should deﬁne the basic terms of their association. Yet we may still say, despite this disagreement, that they each have a conception of justice. That is, they understand the need for, and they are prepared to afﬁrm, a characteristic set of prin ciples for assigning basic rights andduties and for determining what they take to be the proper distribution of the beneﬁts and burdens of social cooperation. Thus it seems natural to think of the concept of justice as distinct from the various conceptions of justice and as being speciﬁed by the role which these different sets of principles, these different conceptions, have in common. 1 Those who hold different conceptions of justice can, then, still agree that institutions are just when no arbitrary distinctions are made between persons in the assigning of basic rights and duties and when the rules determine a proper balance between competing claims to the advantages of social life. Men can agree to this description of just institutions since the notions of an arbitrary distinction and of a proper balance, which are included in the concept of justice, are left open for each to interpret according to the principles of justice that he accepts . These principles single out whichsimilarities and differences among persons are relevant in determining rights and duties and they specify which division of advantages is appropriate. Clearly this distinction between the concept and the various con ceptions of justice settles no important questions. It simply helps to identify the role of the principles of social justice.Some measure of agreement in conceptions of justice is, however, not the only prerequisite for a viable human community. There are other fundamental social problems, in par ticular those of coordination, efﬁci-ency, and stability. Thus the plans of individuals need to be ﬁtted together so that their activities are compatible with one another and they can all be carried through without anyone’s legitimate expectations being severely disappointed. Moreover, the execution of these plans should lead to the 1. Here I follow H. L. A. Hart, The Concept of Law (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1961), pp. 155– 159.51. The Role of Justice achievement of social ends in ways that are efﬁcient and consistent with justice. And ﬁnally, the scheme of social cooperation must be stable: it must be more or less regularly complied with and its basic rules willingly acted upon; and when infractions occur, stabilizing forces should exist that prevent further violations and tend to restore the arrangement. Now it is evident that these three problems are connected with that of justice. In the absence of a certain measure of agreement on what is just and unjust, it is clearly more difﬁcult for individuals to coordinate their plans efﬁciently in order to insure that mutually beneﬁcial arrangements aremaintained. Distrust and resentment corrode the ties of civility, and suspicion and hostility tempt men to act in ways they would otherwise avoid. So while the distinctive role of concep tions of justice is to specify basic rights and duties and to determine the appropriate distributive shares, the way in which a conception does this is bound to affect the problems of efﬁciency, coordination, and stability. We cannot, in general, assess a conception of justice by its distributive role alone, however useful this role may be in identifying the concept of justice. We must take into account its wider connections; for even though justice has a certain priority, being the most important virtue of institutions, it is still true that, other things equal, one conception of justice is preferable to another when its broader consequences are more desirable.2. THE SUBJECT OF JUSTICE 2. The Subject of Justice Many different kinds of things are said to be just and unjust: not only laws, institutions, and social systems, but also particular actions of many kinds, including decisions, judgments, and imputations. We also call the attitudes and dispositions of persons, and persons themselves, just and unjust. Our topic, however, is that of social justice. For us the primary subject of justice is the basic structure of society, or more exactly, the way in which the major social institutions distribute fundamental rights and duties and determine the division of advantages from social cooperation. By major institutions I understand the political constitution and the prin cipal economic and social arrangements. Thus the legal protection of freedom of thought and liberty of conscience, competitive markets, private property in the means of production, and the monogamous family are examples of major social institutions. Taken together as one scheme, the major institutions deﬁne men’s rights and duties and inﬂuence their life prospects, what they can expect to be and how well they can hope to 6Justice as Fairness do. The basic structure is the primary subject of justice because its effects are so profound and present from the start. The intuitive notion here is that this structure contains various social positions and that men born into different positions have different expectations of life determined, in part, by the political system as well as by economic and social circumstances. In this way the institutions of society favor certain starting places over others. These are especially deep inequalities. Not only are they perva sive, but they affect men’s initial chances in life; yet they cannot possibly be justiﬁed by an appeal to the notions of merit or desert. It is these inequalities, presumably inevitable in the basic structure of any society, to which the principles of social justice must in the ﬁrst instance apply. These principles, then, regulate the choice of a political constitution andthe main elements of the economic and social system. The justice of a social scheme depends essentially on how fundamental rights and duties are assigned and on the economic opportunities and social conditions in the various sectors of society. The scope of our inquiry is limited in two ways. First of all, I am concerned with a special case of the problem of justice. I shall not consider the justice of institutions and social practices generally, nor except in passing the justice of the law of nations and of relations between states (§58). Therefore, if one supposes that the concept of justice applieswhenever there is an allotment of something rationally regarded as advan tageous or disadvantageous, then we are interested in only one instance of its application. There is no reason to suppose ahead of time that the principles satisfactory for the basic structure hold for all cases. These principles may not work for the rules and practices of private associations or for those of less comprehensive social groups. They may be irrelevant for the various informal conventions and customs of everyday life; they may not elucidate the justice, or perhaps better, the fairness of voluntary cooperative arrangements or procedures for making contractual agreements. The conditions for the law of nations may require different princi ples arrived at in a somewhat different way. I shall be satisﬁed if it is possible to formulate a reasonable conception of justice for the basic structure of society conceived for the time being as a closed system isolated from other societies. The signiﬁcance of this special case is obvious and needs no explanation. It is natural to conjecture that once we have a sound theory for this case, the remaining problems of justice will prove more tractable in the light of it. With suitable modiﬁcations such a theory should provide the key for some of these other questions. The other limitation on our discussion is that for the most part I 72. The Subject of Justice examine the principles of justice th at would regulate a well-ordered society. Everyone is presumed to act justly and to do his part in upholding just institutions. Though justice may be, as Hume remarked, the cautious, jealous virtue, we can still ask what a perfectly just society would be like. 2 Thus I consider primarily what I call strict compliance as opposed to partial compliance theory (§§25, 39). The latter studies the principles that govern how we are to deal with injustice. It comprises such topics as the theory of punishment, the doctrine of just war, and the justiﬁcation of the various ways of opposing unjust regimes, ranging from civil disobedience and conscientious objection to militant resistance and revolution. Also included here are questions of compensatory justice and of weighing one form of institutional injustice against another. Obviously the problems of partial compliance theory are the pressing and urgent matters. These are the things that we are faced with in everyday life. The reason for beginning with ideal theory is that it provides, I believe, the only basis for the systematic grasp of these more pressing problems. The discussion of civil disobedience, for example, depends upon it (§§55–59). At least, I shall assume that a deeper understanding can be gained in no other way, and that the nature and aims of a perfectly just society is the fundamental part of the theory of justice.Now admittedly the concept of the basic structure is somewhat vague. It is not always clear which institutions or features thereof should be included. But it would be premature to worry about this matter here. I shall proceed by discussing principles which do apply to what is certainly a part of the basic structure as intuitively understood; I shall then try to extend the application of these principles so that they cover what would appear to be the main elements of this structure. Perhaps these princi-ples will turn out to be perfectly general, although this is unlikely. It is sufﬁcient that they apply to the most important cases of social justice. The point to keep in mind is that a conception of justice for the basic structure is worth having for its ow n sake. It should not be dismissed because its principles are not everywhere satisfactory. A conception of social justice, then, is to be regarded as providing in the ﬁrst instance a standard whereby the distributive aspects of the basic structure of society are to be assessed. This standard, however, is not to be confused with the principles deﬁning the other virtues, for the basic structure, and social arrangements generally, may be efﬁcient or inefﬁ2. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, sec. III, pt. I, par. 3, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, 2nd edition (Oxford, 1902), p. 184.8Justice as Fairness cient, liberal or illiberal, and many other things, as well as just or unjust. A complete conception deﬁning principles for all the virtues of the basic structure, together with their respective weights when they conﬂict, is more than a conception of justice; it is a social ideal. The principles of justice are but a part, although perhaps the most important part, of such a conception. A social ideal in turn is connected with a conception of society, a vision of the way in which the aims and purposes of social cooperation are to be understood. The various conceptions of justice are the outgrowth of different notions of society against the background ofopposing views of the natural necessities and opportunities of human life. Fully to understand a conception of justice we must make explicit the conception of social cooperation from which it derives. But in doing this we should not lose sight of the special role of the principles of justice orof the primary subject to which they apply. In these preliminary remarks I have distinguished the concept of justice as meaning a proper balance between competing claims from a conception of justice as a set of related principles for identifying the relevant considerations which determine this balance. I have also characterized justice as but one part of a social ideal, although the theory I shall propose no doubt extends its everyday sense. This theory is not offered as a description of ordinary meanings but as an account of certain distributive principles for the basic structure of society. I assume that any reasonably complete ethical theory must in clude principles for this fundamentalproblem and that these principles, whatever they are, constitute its doc trine of justice. The concept of justice I take to be deﬁned, then, by the role of its principles in assigning rights and duties and in deﬁning the appropriate division of social advant ages. A conception of justice is an interpretation of this role.Now this approach may not seem to tally with tradition. I believe, though, that it does. The more speciﬁc sense that Aristotle gives to justice, and from which the most familiar formulations derive, is that of refraining from pleonexia, that is, from gaining some advantage for oneself by seizing what belongs to another, his property, his reward, his ofﬁce, and the like, or by denying a person that which is due to him, the fulﬁllment of a promise, the repayment of a debt, the showing of proper respect, and so on.3 It is evident that this deﬁnition is framed to apply to actions, and 3. Nicomachean Ethics, 1129b–1130b5. I have followed the interpretation of Gregory Vlastos, “Justice and Happiness in The Republic,” in Plato: A Collection of Critical Essays, edited by Vlastos (Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday and Company, 1971), vo l. 2, pp. 70f. For a discussion of Aristotle on justice, see W. F. R. Hardie, Aristotle’s Ethical Theory (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1968), ch. X. 92. The Subject of Justice persons are thought to be just insofar as they have, as one of the permanent elements of their character, a stea dy and effective desire to act justly. Aristotle’s deﬁnition clearly presupposes, however, an account of what properly belongs to a person and of what is due to him. Now such entitlements are, I believe, very often derived from social institutions and the legitimate expectations to which they give rise. There is no reason to think that Aristotle would disagree with this, and certainly he has a conception of social justice to account for these claims. The deﬁnition I adopt is designed to apply directly to the most important case, the justice of the basic structure. There is no conﬂict with the traditional notion. 3. THE MAIN IDEA OF THE THEORY OF JUSTICE 3. The Main Idea of the Theory My aim is to present a conception of justice which generalizes and carries to a higher level of abstraction the familiar theory of the social contract as found, say, in Locke, Rousseau, and Kant. 4 In order to do this we are not to think of the original contract as one to enter a particular society or to set up a particular form of government. Rather, the guiding idea is that the principles of justice for the basic structure of society are the object of theoriginal agreement. They are the principles that free and rational persons concerned to further their own interests would accept in an initial position of equality as deﬁning the fundamental terms of their association. These principles are to regulate all further agreements; they specify the kinds of social cooperation that can be entered into and the forms of government that can be established. This way of regarding the principles of justice I shall call justice as fairness. Thus we are to imagine that those who engage in social cooperation choose together, in one joint act, the principles which are to assign basic rights and duties and to determine the division of social beneﬁts. Men are to decide in advance how they are to regulate their claims against one another and what is to be the foundation charter of their society. Just as each person must decide by rational reﬂection what constitutes his good, 4. As the text suggests, I shall regard Locke’s Second Treatise of Government, Rousseau’s TheSocial Contract, and Kant’s ethical works beginning with The Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals as deﬁnitive of the contract tradition. For all of its greatness, Hobbes’s Leviathan raisesspecial problems. A general historical survey is provided by J. W. Gough, The Social Contract, 2nded. (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1957), and Otto Gierke, Natural Law and the Theory of Society, trans. with an introduction by Ernest Barker (Cam bridge, The University Press, 1934). A presentation of the contract view as primarily an ethical theory is to be found in G. R. Grice, The Grounds of Moral Judgment (Cambridge, The University Press, 1967). See also §19, note 30. 10Justice as Fairness that is, the system of ends which it is rational for him to pursue, so a group of persons must decide once and for all what is to count among them as just and unjust. The choice which rational men would make in this hypothetical situation of equal liberty, assuming for the present that this choice problem has a solution, determines the principles of justice.In justice as fairness the original position of equality corresponds to the state of nature in the traditional theory of the social contract. Thisoriginal position is not, of course, thought of as an actual historical stateof affairs, much less as a primitive condition of culture. It is understood as a purely hypothetical situation characterized so as to lead to a certain conception of justice.5 Among the essential features of this situation is that no one knows his place in society, his class position or social status, nor does any one know his fortune in the distribution of natural assets and abilities, his intelligence, strength, and the like. I shall even assume that the parties do not know their conceptions of the good or their special psychological propensities. The principles of justice are chosen behind a veil of ignorance. This ensures that no one is advantaged or disadvantaged in the choice of principles by the outcome of natural chance or the contingency of social circumstances. Since all are similarly situated and no one is able to design principles to favor his particular condition, the principles of justice are the result of a fair agreement or bargain. For given the circumstances of the original position, the symmetry of everyone’s relations to each other, this initial situation is fair between individu als as moral persons, that is, as rational beings with their own ends and capable, I shall assume, of a sense of justice. The original position is, one might say, the appropriate initial status quo, and thus the fundamental agreements reached in it are fair. This explains the propriety of the name “justice as fairness”: it conveys the idea that the principles of justice are agreed to in an initial situation that is fair. The name does not mean that the concepts of justice and fairness are the same, any more than the phrase “poetry as metaphor” means that the concepts of poetry and meta phor are the same.Justice as fairness begins, as I have said, with one of the most general of all choices which persons might make together, namely, with the 5. Kant is clear that the orig inal agreement is hypothetical. See The Metaphysics of Morals, pt. I(Rechtslehre), especially §§47, 52; and pt. II of the essay “Concerning the Common Saying: ThisMay Be True in Theory but It Does Not Apply in Practice,” in Kant’s Political Writings, ed. HansReiss and trans. by H. B. Nisb et (Cambridge, The University Press, 1970), pp. 73–87. See Georges Vlachos, La Pensée politique de Kant (Paris, Presses Universitaires de France, 1962), pp. 326–335; and J. G. Murphy, Kant: The Philosophy of Right (London, Macmillan, 1970), pp. 109–112, 133–136, for a further discussion.113. The Main Idea of the Theory choice of the ﬁrst principles of a con ception of justice which is to regulate all subsequent criticism and reform of institutions. Then, having chosen a conception of justice, we can suppose that they are to choose a constitution and a legislature to enact laws, and so on, all in accordance with the principles of justice initially agreed upon. Our social situation is just if itis such that by this sequence of hypothetical agreements we would have contracted into the general system of rules which deﬁnes it. Moreover, assuming that the original position does determine a set of principles (that is, that a particular conception of justice would be chosen), it will then be true that whenever social institutions satisfy these principles those engaged in them can say to one another that they are cooperating on terms to which they would agree if they were free and equal persons whose relations with respect to one another were fair. They could all view their arrangements as meeting the stipulations which they would acknowledge in an initial situation that embodies widely accepted and reasonable con straints on the choice of principles. The general recognition of this fact would provide the basis for a public acceptance of the corresponding principles of justice. No society can, of course, be a scheme of cooperation which men enter voluntarily in a literal sense; each person ﬁnds himself placed at birth in some particular position in some particular society, and the nature of this position materially affects his life prospects. Yet a society satisfying the principles of justice as fairness comes as close as a society can to being a voluntary scheme, for it meets the principles which free and equal persons would assent to under circumstances that are fair. In this sense its members are autonomous and the obligations they recognize self-imposed. One feature of justice as fairness is to think of the parties in the initial situation as rational and mutually disinterested. This does not mean that the parties are egoists, that is, i ndividuals with only certain kinds of interests, say in wealth, prestige, and domination. But they are conceived as not taking an interest in one another’s interests. They are to presume that even their spiritual aims may be opposed, in the way that the aims of those of different religions may be opposed. Moreover, the concept of rationality must be interpreted as far as possible in the narrow sense, standard in economic theory, of taking the most effective means to given ends. I shall modify this concept to some extent, as explained later (§25), but one must try to avoid introducing into it any controversial ethical elements. The initial situation must be characterized by stipulations that are widely accepted.In working out the conception of justice as fairness one main task 12Justice as Fairness clearly is to determine which principles of justice would be chosen in the original position. To do this we must describe this situation in some detail and formulate with care the problem of choice which it presents. These matters I shall take up in the immediately succeeding chapters. It may be observed, however, that once the prin ciples of justice are thought of asarising from an original agreement in a situation of equality, it is an open question whether the principle of utility would be acknowledged. Off hand it hardly seems likely that persons who view themselves as equals, entitled to press their claims upon one a nother, would agree to a principle which may require lesser life prospects for some simply for the sake of a greater sum of advantages enjoyed by others. Since each desires to protect his interests, his capacity to advance his conception of the good, no one has a reason to acquiesce in an enduring loss for himself in order to bring about a greater net balance of satisfaction. In the absence of strong and lasting benevolent impulses, a rational man would not accept a basic structure merely because it maximized the algebraic sum of advantages irrespective of its permanent effects on his own basic rights and interests. Thus it seems that the principle of utility is incompatible with the conception of social cooperation among equals for mutual advantage. It appears to be inconsistent with the idea of reciprocity implicit in the notion of a well-ordered society. Or, at any rate, so I shall argue. I shall maintain instead that the persons in the initial situation would choose two rather different principles: the ﬁrst requires equality in the assignment of basic rights and duties, while the second holds that social and economic inequalities, for example inequalities of wealth and authority, are just only if they result in compensating beneﬁts for everyone, and in particular for the least advantaged members of society. These principles rule out justifying institutions on the grounds that the hardships of some are offset by a greater good in the aggregate. It may be expedient but it is not just that some should have less in order that others may prosper. But there is no injustice in the greater beneﬁts earned by a few provided that the situation of persons not so fortunate is thereby improved. The intuitive idea is that since everyone’s well-being depends upon a scheme of cooperation without which no one could have a satisfactory life, the division of advantages should be such as to draw forth the willing cooperation of everyone taking part in it, including those less well situated. The two principles mentioned seem to be a fair basis on which those better endowed, or more fortunate in their social position, neither of which we can be said to deserve, could expect the willing cooperation of others when some workable scheme is a necessary condition of the wel133. The Main Idea of the Theory fare of all. 6 Once we decide to look for a conception of justice that prevents the use of the accidents of natural endowment and the contingencies of social circumstance as counters in a quest for political and economic advantage, we are led to these principles. They express the result of leaving aside those aspects of the social world that seem arbitrary from a moral point of view. The problem of the choice of principles, however, is extremely difﬁcult. I do not expect the answer I shall suggest to be convincing to everyone. It is, therefore, worth noting from the outset that justice as fairness, like other contract views, consists of two parts: (1) an interpretation of the initial situation and of the problem of choice posed there, and (2) a set of principles which, it is argued, would be agreed to. One may accept the ﬁrst part of the theory (or some variant thereof), but not the other, and conversely. The concept of the initial contractual situation may seem reasonable although the particular principles proposed are rejected.To be sure, I want to maintain that the most appropriate conception of this situation does lead to principles of justice contrary to utilitarianism and perfectionism, and therefore that the contract doctrine provides an alternative to these views. Still, one may dispute this contention even though one grants that the contractarian method is a useful way of studying ethical theories and of setting forth their underlying assumptions.Justice as fairness is an example of what I have called a contract theory. Now there may be an objection to the term “contract” and related expressions, but I think it will serve reasonably well. Many words have misleading connotations which at ﬁrst are likely to confuse. The terms “utility” and “utilitarianism” are surely no exception. They too have un fortunate suggestions which hostile critics have been willing to exploit; yet they are clear enough for those prepared to study utilitarian doctrine. The same should be true of the term “contract” applied to moral theories. As I have mentioned, to understand it one has to keep in mind that it implies a certain level of abstraction. In particular, the content of the relevant agreement is not to enter a given society or to adopt a given form of government, but to accept certain moral principles. Moreover, the undertakings referred to are purely hypot hetical: a contract view holds that certain principles would be accepted in a well-deﬁned initial situation. The merit of the contract terminology is that it conveys the idea that principles of justice may be conceived as principles that would be chosen by rational persons, and that in this way conceptions of justice may be 6. For the formulation of this intuitive idea I am indebted to Allan Gibbard.14Justice as Fairness explained and justiﬁed. The theory of justice is a part, perhaps the most signiﬁcant part, of the theory of rational choice. Furthermore, principles of justice deal with conﬂicting claims upon the advantages won by social cooperation; they apply to the relations among several persons or groups. The word “contract” suggests this plurality as well as the condition that the appropriate division of advantages must be in accordance with principles acceptable to all parties. The condition of publicity for principles of justice is also connoted by the contract phraseology. Thus, if these principles are the outcome of an agreement, citizens have a knowledge of the principles that others follow. It is characteristic of contract theories to stress the public nature of political principles. Finally there is the long tradition of the contract doctrine. Expressing the tie with this line of thought helps to deﬁne ideas and accords with natural piety. There are then several advantages in the use of the term “contract.” With due precautions taken, it should not be misleading. A ﬁnal remark. Justice as fairness is not a complete contract theory. For it is clear that the contractarian idea can be extended to the choice of more or less an entire ethical system, that is, to a system including principles for all the virtues and not only for justice. Now for the most part I shall consider only principles of justice and others closely related to them; I make no attempt to discuss the virtues in a systematic way. Obviously if justice as fairness succeeds reasonably well, a next step would be to study the more general view suggested by the name “right ness as fairness.” But even this wider theory fails to embrace all moral relationships, since it would seem to include only our relations with other persons and to leave out of account how we are to conduct ourselves toward animals and the rest of nature. I do not contend that the contract notion offers a way to approach these questions which are certainly of the ﬁrst importance; and I shall have to put them aside. We must recognize the limited scope of justice as fairness and of the general type of view that it exempliﬁes. How far its conclusions must be revised once these other matters are understood cannot be decided in advance. 4. THE ORIGINAL POSITION AND JUSTIFICATION 4. The Original Position I have said that the original position is the appropriate initial status quo which insures that the fundamental agreements reached in it are fair. This fact yields the name “justice as fairness.” It is clear, then, that I want to say that one conception of justice is more reasonable than another, or 154. The Original Position justiﬁable with respect to it, if ra tional persons in the initial situationwould choose its principles over those of the other for the role of justice. Conceptions of justice are to be ranked by their acceptability to persons so circumstanced. Understood in this way the question of justiﬁcation is settled by working out a problem of deliberation: we have to ascertain which principles it would be rational to adopt given the contractual situation. This connects the theory of justice with the theory of rational choice.If this view of the problem of justiﬁcation is to succeed, we must, of course, describe in some detail the nature of this choice problem. A problem of rational decision has a deﬁnite answer only if we know the beliefs and interests of the parties, their relations with respect to one another, the alternatives between which they are to choose, the procedure whereby they make up their minds, and so on. As the circumstances are presented in different ways, corres pondingly different principles are accepted. The concept of the original positi on, as I shall refer to it, is that ofthe most philosophically favored interpretation of this initial choice situ ation for the purposes of a theory of justice.But how are we to decide what is the most favored interpretation? I assume, for one thing, that there is a broad measure of agreement that principles of justice should be chosen under certain conditions. To justify a particular description of the initial situation one shows that it incorporates these commonly shared presumptions. One argues from widely accepted but weak premises to more speciﬁc conclusions. Each of the presumptions should by itself be natural and plausible; some of them may seem innocuous or even trivial. The aim of the contract approach is to establish that taken together they impose signiﬁcant bounds on acceptable principles of justice. The ideal outcome would be that these conditions determine a unique set of principles; but I shall be satisﬁed if they sufﬁce to rank the main traditional conceptions of social justice.One should not be misled, then, by the somewhat unusual conditions which characterize the original position. The idea here is simply to make vivid to ourselves the restrictions that it seems reasonable to impose on arguments for principles of justice, and therefore on these principles themselves. Thus it seems reasonable and generally acceptable that no one should be advantaged or disadvantaged by natural fortune or social circumstances in the choice of principles. It also seems widely agreedthat it should be impossible to tailor principles to the circumstances of one’s own case. We should insure further that particular inclinations and aspirations, and persons’ conceptions of their good do not affect the prin16Justice as Fairness ciples adopted. The aim is to rule out those principles that it would be rational to propose for acceptance, however little the chance of success, only if one knew certain things that are irrelevant from the standpoint of justice. For example, if a man knew that he was wealthy, he might ﬁnd it rational to advance the principle that various taxes for welfare measures be counted unjust; if he knew that he was poor, he would most likely propose the contrary principle. To represent the desired restrictions one imagines a situation in which everyone is deprived of this sort of information. One excludes the knowledge of those contingencies which sets men at odds and allows them to be guided by their prejudices. In this manner the veil of ignorance is arrived at in a natural way. This concept should cause no difﬁculty if we keep in mind the constraints on arguments that it is meant to express. At any time we can enter the original position, so to speak, simply by following a certain procedure, namely, by arguing for principles of justice in accordance with these restrictions.It seems reasonable to suppose that the parties in the original position are equal. That is, all have the same rights in the procedure for choosing principles; each can make proposals, submit reasons for their acceptance, and so on. Obviously the purpose of these conditions is to represent equality between human beings as moral persons, as creatures having a conception of their good and capable of a sense of justice. The basis of equality is taken to be similarity in these two respects. Systems of ends are not ranked in value; and each man is presumed to have the requisite ability to understand and to act upon whatever principles are adopted. Together with the veil of ignorance, these conditions deﬁne the principles of justice as those which rational persons concerned to advance their interests would consent to as equals when none are known to be advantaged or disadvantaged by social and natural contingencies. There is, however, another side to justifying a particular description of the original position. This is to see if the principles which would be chosen match our considered convictions of justice or extend them in an acceptable way. We can note whether applying these principles would lead us to make the same judgments about the basic structure of society which we now make intuitively and in which we have the greatest conﬁdence; or whether, in cases where our present judgments are in doubt and given with hesitation, these principles offer a resolution which we can afﬁrm on reﬂection. There are questions which we feel sure must be answered in a certain way. For example, we are conﬁdent that religious intolerance and racial discrimination are unjust. We think that we have examined these things with care and have reached what we believe is an 174. The Original Position impartial judgment not likely to be distorted by an excessive attention to our own interests. These convictions are provisional ﬁxed points which we presume any conception of justice must ﬁt. But we have much less assurance as to what is the correct distribution of wealth and authority. Here we may be looking for a way to remove our doubts. We can check an interpretation of the initial situation, then, by the capacity of its principles to accommodate our ﬁrmest convictions and to provide guidance where guidance is needed.In searching for the most favored description of this situation we work from both ends. We begin by describing it so that it represents generally shared and preferably weak conditions. We then see if these conditions are strong enough to yield a signiﬁcant set of principles. If not, we lookfor further premises equally reasonable. But if so, and these principlesmatch our considered convictions of justice, then so far well and good. But presumably there will be discrepancies. In this case we have a choice. We can either modify the account of the initial situation or we can revise our existing judgments, for even the judgments we take provisionally as ﬁxed points are liable to revision. By going back and forth, sometimes altering the conditions of the contractual circumstances, at others withdrawing our judgments and conforming them to principle, I assume that eventually we shall ﬁnd a description of the initial situation that both expresses reasonable conditions and yields principles which match our considered judgments duly pruned and adjusted. This state of affairs I refer to as reﬂective equilibrium. 7 It is an equilibrium because at last our principles and judgments coincide; and it is reﬂective since we know to what principles our judgments conform and the premises of their derivation. At the moment everything is in order. But this equilibrium is not necessarily stable. It is liable to be upset by further examination of the conditions which should be imposed on the contractual situation and byparticular cases which may lead us to revise our judgments. Yet for the time being we have done what we can to render coherent and to justify our convictions of social justice. We have reached a conception of the original position.I shall not, of course, actually work through this process. Still, we may think of the interpretation of the original position that I shall present as the result of such a hypothetical course of reﬂection. It represents the 7. The process of mutual adjustment of princi ples and considered judgments is not peculiar tomoral philosophy. See Nelson Goodman, Fact, Fiction, and Forecast (Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1955), pp. 65–68, for parallel rema rks concerning the justiﬁcation of the principlesof deductive and inductive inference. 18Justice as Fairness attempt to accommodate within one scheme both reasonable philosophical conditions on principles as well as our considered judgments of justice. In arriving at the favored interp retation of the initial situation there is no point at which an appeal is made to self-evidence in the traditional sense either of general conceptions or particular convictions. I do not claim for the principles of justice proposed that they are necessary truths or derivable from such truths. A conception of justice cannot be de duced from self-evident premises or conditions on principles; instead, its justiﬁcation is a matter of the mutual support of many considerations, of everything ﬁtting together into one coherent view. A ﬁnal comment. We shall want to say that certain principles of justice are justiﬁed because they would be agreed to in an initial situation of equality. I have emphasized that this original position is purely hypothetical. It is natural to ask why, if this agreement is never actually entered into, we should take any interest in these principles, moral or otherwise. The answer is that the conditions embodied in the description of theoriginal position are ones that we do in fact accept. Or if we do not, then perhaps we can be persuaded to do so by philosophical reﬂection. Each aspect of the contractual situati on can be given supporting grounds. Thus what we shall do is to collect together into one conception a number of conditions on principles that we are ready upon due consideration to recognize as reasonable. These constraints express what we are prepared to regard as limits on fair terms of social cooperation. One way to look at the idea of the original position, therefore, is to see it as an expository device which sums up the meaning of these conditions and helps us to extract their consequences. On the other hand, this conception is also an intuitive notion that suggests its own elaboration, so that led on by it we are drawn to deﬁne more clearly the standpoint from which we can best interpret moral relationships. We need a conception that enables us to envision our objective from afar: the intuitive notion of the original position is to do this for us.85. CLASSICAL UTILITARIANISM 5. Classical Utilitarianism There are many forms of utilitarianism, and the development of the the ory has continued in recent years. I shall not survey these forms here, nor 8. Henri Poincaré remarks: “Il nous faut une facu lté qui nous fasse voir le but de loin, et, cette faculté, c’est l’intuition.” La Valeur de la science (Paris, Flammarion, 1909), p. 27. 195. Classical Utilitarianism take account of the numerous reﬁnements found in contemporary discussions. My aim is to work out a theory of justice that represents an alternative to utilitarian thought generally and so to all of these different versions of it. I believe that the contrast between the contract view and utilitarianism remains essentially the same in all these cases. Therefore I shall compare justice as fairness with familiar variants of intuitionism, perfectionism, and utilitarianism in order to bring out the underlyingdifferences in the simplest way. With this end in mind, the kind of utilitarianism I shall describe here is the strict classical doctrine which receives perhaps its clearest and most accessible formulation in Sidgwick. The main idea is that society is rightly ordered, and therefore just, when its major institutions are arranged so as to achieve the greatest net balance of satisfaction summed over all the individuals belonging to it. 9We may note ﬁrst that there is, i ndeed, a way of thinking of society which makes it easy to suppose that the most rational conception of jus9. I shall take Henry Sidgwick’s The Methods of Ethics, 7th ed. (London, 1907), as summarizingthe development of utilitarian moral theory. Book III of his Principles of Political Economy (London,1883) applies this doctrine to questions of economic and social justice, and is a precursor of A. C. Pigou, The Economics of Welfare (London, Macmillan, 1920). Sidgwick’s Outlines of the History of Ethics, 5th ed. (London, 1902), contains a brief history of the utilitarian tradition. We may follow him in assuming, somewhat arbitrarily, that it begins with Shaftesbury’s An Inquiry Concerning Virtue and Merit (1711) and Hutcheson’s An Inquiry Concerning Moral Good and Evil (1725). Hutchesonseems to have been the ﬁrst to state clearly the principle of utility. He says in Inquiry, sec. 111, §8,that “that action is best, which procures the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers; and that,worst, which, in like manner, occasions misery.” Other major eighteenth century works are Hume’s ATreatise of Human Nature (1739), and An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals (1751);Adam Smith’s A Theory of the Moral Sentiments (1759); and Bentham’s The Principles of Morals and Legislation (1789). To these we must add the writings of J. S. Mill represented by Utilitarianism (1863) and F. Y. Edgeworth’s Mathematical Psychics (London, 1888).The discussion of utilitarianism has taken a differ ent turn in recent years by focusing on what we may call the coordination problem and related questions of publicity. This development stems from the essays of R. F. Harrod, “Utilitarianism Revised,” Mind, vol. 45 (1936); J. D. Mabbott, “Punishment,” Mind, vol. 48 (1939); Jonathan Harrison, “Utilitarianism, Universalisation, and Our Duty to Be Just,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 53 (1952–53); and J. O. Urmson, “The Interpretation of the Philosophy of J. S. Mill,” Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 3 (1953). See also J. J. C. Smart, “Extreme and Restricted Utilitarianism,” Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 6 (1956), and his AnOutline of a System of Utilitarian Ethics (Cambridge, The University Press, 1961). For an account of these matters, see David Lyons, Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1965); and Allan Gibbard, “Utilitarianisms and Coordi nation” (dissertation, Harvard University, 1971). The problems raised by these works, as important as they are, I shall le ave aside as not bearing directly on the more elementary question of distribution which I wish to discuss. Finally, we should note here the essays of J. C. Ha rsanyi, in particular, “Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of Risk-Taking,” Journal of Political Economy, 1953, and “CardinalWelfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Comparisons of Utility,” Journal of Political Economy, 1955; and R. B. Brandt, “Some Merits of One Form of Rule-Utilitarianism,” University of Colorado Studies (Boulder, Colorado, 1967). See below §§27–28. 20Justice as Fairness tice is utilitarian. For consider: each man in realizing his own interests is certainly free to balance his own losses against his own gains. We may impose a sacriﬁce on ourselves now for the sake of a greater advantage later. A person quite properly acts, at least when others are not affected, to achieve his own greatest good, to advance his rational ends as far as possible. Now why should not a societ y act on precisely the same princi-ple applied to the group and therefore regard that which is rational for one man as right for an association of men? Just as the well-being of a person is constructed from the series of satisfactions that are experienced at different moments in the course of his life, so in very much the same way the well-being of society is to be constructed from the fulﬁllment of the systems of desires of the many individuals who belong to it. Since the principle for an individual is to advance as far as possible his own welfare, his own system of desires, the principle for society is to advance as far as possible the welfare of the group, to realize to the greatest extent the comprehensive system of desire arrived at from the desires of its members. Just as an individual balances present and future gains against present and future losses, so a society may balance satisfactions and dissatisfactions between different i ndividuals. And so by these reﬂections one reaches the principle of utility in a natural way: a society is properly arranged when its institutions maximize the net balance of satisfaction. The principle of choice for an association of men is interpreted as an extension of the principle of choice for one man. Social justice is the principle of rational prudence applied to an aggregative conception of the welfare of the group (§30). 10This idea is made all the more attractive by a further consideration. The two main concepts of ethics are those of the right and the good; the concept of a morally worthy person is, I believe, derived from them. The structure of an ethical theory is, then, largely determined by how it deﬁnes and connects these two basic notions. Now it seems that the simplest way of relating them is taken by teleological theories: the good is deﬁned 10. On this point see also D. P. Gauthier, Practical Reasoning (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1963),pp. 126f. The text elaborates the suggestion found in “Constitutional Liberty and the Concept of Justice,” Nomos VI: Justice, ed. C. J. Friedrich and J. W. Ch apman (New York, Atherton Press, 1963), pp. 124f, which in turn is related to the idea of ju stice as a higher-order admi nistrative decision. See “Justice as Fairness,” Philosophical Review, 1958, pp. 185–187. For references to utilitarians who explicitly afﬁrm this extension, see §30, note 37. That the principle of social integration is distinct from the principle of personal integration is stated by R. B. Perry, General Theory of Value (New York, Longmans, Green, and Company, 1926), pp. 674–677. He attributes the error of overlooking this fact to Emile Durkheim and others with simila r views. Perry’s conception of social integration is that brought about by a shared and dominant benevolent purpose. See below, §24. 215. Classical Utilitarianism independently from the right, and then the right is deﬁned as that which maximizes the good.11 More precisely, those institutions and acts are right which of the available alternatives produce the most good, or at least as much good as any of the other institutions and acts open as real possibili ties (a rider needed when the maximal class is not a singleton). Teleological theories have a deep intuitive appeal since they seem to embody the idea of rationality. It is natural to think that rationality is maximizing something and that in morals it must be maximizing the good. Indeed, it is tempting to suppose that it is self-evident that things should be arranged so as to lead to the most good.It is essential to keep in mind that in a teleological theory the good is deﬁned independently from the right. This means two things. First, the theory accounts for our considered judgments as to which things are good (our judgments of value) as a separate class of judgments intuitively distinguishable by common sense, and then proposes the hypothesis that the right is maximizing the good as already speciﬁed. Second, the theory enables one to judge the goodness of things without referring to what is right. For example, if pleasure is said to be the sole good, then presumably pleasures can be recognized and ranked in value by criteria that do not presuppose any standards of right, or what we would normally think of as such. Whereas if the distribu tion of goods is also counted as a good,perhaps a higher order one, and the theory directs us to produce the most good (including the good of distribu tion among others), we no longer have a teleological view in the classi cal sense. The problem of distribution falls under the concept of right as one intuitively understands it, and so the theory lacks an independent deﬁnition of the good. The clarity and simplicity of classical teleological theories derives largely from the fact that they factor our moral judgments into two classes, the one being characterized separately while the other is then connected with it by amaximizing principle.Teleological doctrines differ, pretty clearly, according to how the conception of the good is speciﬁed. If it is taken as the realization of human excellence in the various forms of culture, we have what may be called perfectionism. This notion is found in Aristotle and Nietzsche, among others. If the good is deﬁned as pleasure, we have hedonism; if as happiness, eudaimonism, and so on. I shall understand the principle of utility in its classical form as deﬁning the good as the satisfaction of desire, or 11. Here I adopt W. K. Frankena’s deﬁnition of teleological theories in Ethics (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice Hall, Inc., 1963), p. 13.22Justice as Fairness perhaps better, as the satisfaction of rational desire. This accords with the view in all essentials and provides, I believe, a fair interpretation of it. The appropriate terms of social cooperation are settled by whatever in the circumstances will achieve the greatest sum of satisfaction of the rational desires of individuals. It is impossible to deny the initial plausibility and attractiveness of this conception. The striking feature of the utilitarian view of justice is that it does not matter, except indirectly, how this sum of satisfactions is distributed among individuals any more than it matters, except indirectly, how one man distributes his satisfactions over time. The correct distribution in either case is that which yields the maximum fulﬁllment. Society must allocate its means of satisfaction whatever these are, rights and duties, opportunities and privileges, and various forms of wealth, so as to achieve this maximum if it can. But in itself no distribution of satisfaction is better than another except that the more equal distribution is to be pre ferred to break ties.12 It is true that certain common sense precepts of justice, particularly those which concern the protection of liberties and rights, or which express the claims of desert, seem to contradict thiscontention. But from a utilitarian standpoint the explanation of these precepts and of their seemingly stringent character is that they are those precepts which experience shows should be strictly respected and departed from only under exceptional circumstances if the sum of advantages is to be maximized. 13 Yet, as with all other precepts, those of justice are derivative from the one end of attaining the greatest balance of satisfaction. Thus there is no reason in pr inciple why the greater gains of someshould not compensate for the lesser losses of others; or more impor tantly, why the violation of the liberty of a few might not be made right by the greater good shared by many. It simply happens that under most conditions, at least in a reasonably advanced stage of civilization, the greatest sum of advantages is not attained in this way. No doubt the strictness of common sense precepts of justice has a certain usefulness in limiting men’s propensities to injustice and to socially injurious actions, but the utilitarian believes that to afﬁrm this strictness as a ﬁrst principle of morals is a mistake. For just as it is rational for one man to maximize the fulﬁllment of his system of desires, it is right for a society to maximize the net balance of satisfaction taken over all of its members. The most natural way, then, of arriving at utilitarianism (although not, 12. On this point see Sidgwick, The Methods of Ethics, pp. 416f.13. See J. S. Mill, Utilitarianism, ch. V, last two pars. 235. Classical Utilitarianism of course, the only way of doing so) is to adopt for society as a wholethe principle of rational choice for one man. Once this is recognized, the place of the impartial spectator and the emphasis